1:1
In the beginning God created the heavens and the
earth. 1:2 And the earth was without form and void and
darkness was upon the face of the deep and the Spirit of
God fluttered upon the face of the waters.
1:3 And God said, Let there be light and there was
light.
1:4 And God saw the light, that it was good. And God
divided the light from the darkness. 1:5 And God called the
light Day and the darkness he called Night. And there was
evening and there was morning, one day.
1:6 And God said, Let there be an expanse in the midst
of the waters and let it divide the waters from the waters.
1:7 And God made the expanse and divided the waters
which were under the expanse from the waters which
were above the expanse. And it was so. 1:8 And God called
the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was
morning, the second day.
1:9 And God said, Let the waters under the heavens be
gathered together to one place and let the dry land appear.
And it was so. 1:10 And God called the dry land Earth and
he called the gathering together of the waters Seas. And
God saw that it was good.
1:11 And God said, Let the earth put forth grass, herbs
yielding seed, and fruit trees producing fruit (which has
seed in it) according to their kind upon the earth. And it
was so.
1:12 And the earth brought out grass, herbs yielding
seed according to their kind and trees producing fruit
(which has seed in it), according to their kind. And God
saw that it was good. 1:13 And there was evening and there
was morning, the third day.
1:14 And God said, Let there be lights in the expanse
of heaven to divide the day from the night and let them be
for signs and for seasons and for days and years. 1:15 And
let them be for lights in the expanse of heaven to give
light upon the earth. And it was so.
1:16 And God made the two great lights, the greater
light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night
and also the stars. 1:17 And God set them in the expanse of
heaven to give light upon the earth, 1:18
and to rule over
the day and over the night and to divide the light from the
darkness. And God saw that it was good. 1:19 And there
was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.
1:20 And God said, Let the waters swarm with swarms
of living creatures and let birds fly above the earth in the
open expanse of heaven. 1:21 And God created the great
sea creatures and every living creature that moves, which
the waters brought out abundantly, according to their kind
and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw
that it was good.
1:22 And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and
multiply and fill the waters in the seas and let birds
multiply on the earth. 1:23 And there was evening and there
was morning, the fifth day.
1:24 And God said, Let the earth bring forth living
creatures according to their kind: cattle and creeping
things and beasts of the earth according to their kind. And
it was so.
1:25 And God made the beasts of the earth according to
their kind and the cattle according to their kind and
everything that creeps upon the ground according to its
kind. And God saw that it was good.
1:26 And God said, Let Us make man in our image–
after our likeness– and let them have dominion over the
fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over
the cattle, and over all the earth and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the earth. 1:27 And God created man
in his own image, in the image of God he created him; he
created them male and female.
1:28 And God blessed them. And God said to them, Be
fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and have power over
it and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the
birds of the heavens and over every living thing that
moves upon the earth.
1:29 And God said, Behold, I have given you*
every
herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth
and every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed.
To you*
it will be for food,
1:30
and to every beast of the
earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything
that creeps upon the earth in which there is life, every
green herb, for food. And it was so.
1:31 And God saw everything that he had made, and
behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there
was morning, the sixth day.
[Genesis 2] TOC
2:1 And the heavens and the earth were finished and all
the host of them. 2:2 And God finished his work by the
seventh day which he had made and he rested on the
seventh day from all his work which he had made. 2:3 And
God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because he
rested in it from all his work which God had created and
made.
2:4 These are the genealogies of the heavens and of the
earth when they were created, in the day that Jehovah God
made earth and heaven. 2:5 And no plant of the field was
yet in the earth and no herb of the field had yet sprung up,
because Jehovah God had not caused it to rain upon the
earth. And there was not a man to work the ground, 2:6
but
there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole
face of the ground.
2:7 And Jehovah God formed man out of the dust of
the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life
and man became a living soul.
2:8 And Jehovah God
planted a garden eastward in Eden and he put the man
MLVbible.com GENESIS 7
whom he had formed there.
2:9 And out of the ground Jehovah God made to grow
every tree that is desirable to the sight and good for food;
also in the midst of the garden the tree of life and the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil.
2:10 And a river went out of Eden to water the garden
and from there it was divided and became four chief
rivers.
2:11 The name of the first is Pishon. It is that river
which encompasses the whole land of Havilah, where
there is gold. 2:12 And the gold of that land is good; there
is bdellium {sweet smelling gum resin or its plant} and the
onyx stone too.
2:13 And the name of the second river is
Gihon. The same is it which encompasses the whole land
of Cush. 2:14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel
{Tigris}. It is that river which goes east of Assyria. And
the fourth river is the Euphrates.
2:15
 And Jehovah God took the man and put him into
the garden of Eden to work it and to keep it.
2:16 And
Jehovah God commanded the man, saying, You may
freely eat of every tree of the garden, 2:17
but from the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, you will not eat from
it. Because in the day that you eat from it, you will surely
die.
2:18 And Jehovah God said, It is not good that the man
should be alone, I will make a helper for him.
2:19 And out
of the ground Jehovah God formed every beast of the field
and every bird of the heavens and brought them to the
man to see what he would call them; and whatever the
man called every living creature, that was the name of it.
2:20 And the man gave names to all the cattle and to the
birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field, but for
man there was not found a helper for him.
2:21 And Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon
the man and he slept. And God took one of his ribs and
closed up the flesh under it.
2:22 And from the rib, which
Jehovah God had taken from the man, he made a woman
and brought her to the man.
2:23 And the man said, This is now bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh. She will be called Woman, because
she was taken out of Man. 2:24 Therefore a man will leave
his father and his mother and will cling to his wife and the
two will be one flesh. 2:25 And the man and his wife were
both naked and they were not ashamed.
[Genesis 3] TOC
3:1 Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast
of the field which Jehovah God had made. And he said to
the woman, Yes, because God has said, You will not eat
of any tree of the garden? 3:2 And the woman said to the
serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden,
3:3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, God has said, You will not eat of it, nor will you*
touch it, lest you*
 die.
3:4 And the serpent said to the woman, You will not
surely die. 3:5 Because God knows that in the day you*
eat
of it, then your*
eyes will be opened and you* will be like
God, knowing good and evil.
3:6 And when the woman saw that the tree was good
for food and that it was a delight to the eyes and that the
tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took from its
fruit and ate. And she also gave to her husband with her
and he ate. 3:7 And the eyes of them were both opened and
they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig
leaves together and made themselves aprons.
3:8 And they heard the sound of Jehovah God walking
in the garden in the cool of the day. And the man and his
wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah God
among the trees of the garden.
3:9 And Jehovah God called to the man and said to
him, Where are you?
3:10 And he said, I heard your sound in the garden and
I was afraid, because I was naked. And I hid myself.
3:11 And he said, Who told you that you were naked?
Have you eaten of the tree, of which I commanded you
that you should not eat?
3:12 And the man said, The woman whom you gave to
be with me, she gave me of the tree and I ate.
3:13 And Jehovah God said to the woman, What is this
that you have done?
And the woman said, The serpent deceived me and I
ate.
3:14 And Jehovah God said to the serpent, Because you
have done this, cursed are you above all cattle and above
every beast of the field. Upon your belly you will go and
dust you will eat all the days of your life. 3:15 And I will
put enmity between you and the woman and between your
seed and her seed. He will bruise your head and you will
bruise his heel.
3:16 He said to the woman, I will greatly multiply your
pain and your childbearing, in pain you will bring forth
children. And your desire will be to your husband and he
will rule over you.
3:17 And to Adam he said, Because you have obeyed
the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree, of which
I commanded you, saying, You will not eat of it, cursed is
the ground because of you. You will eat of it in toil all the
days of your life.
3:18
Also, it will bring forth thorns and thistles to you
and you will eat the herb of the field. 3:19 You will eat
bread by the sweat of your face, till you return to the
ground, because out of it you were taken. Because you are
dust and you will return to dust.
3:20
And the man called his wife's name Eve, because
she was the mother of all the living.
3:21 And Jehovah God
made for Adam and for his wife coats of skins and clothed
them.
3:22 And Jehovah God said, Behold, the man has
8 GENESIS MLVbible.org
become as one of Us, to know good and evil and now, lest
he put forth his hand and also take of the tree of life and
eat and live everlasting–
3:23
therefore Jehovah God sent
him forth from the garden of Eden, to work the ground
from where he was taken.
3:24 So he drove out the man. And he placed the
cherubim and the flame of a sword which turned every
way at the east of the garden of Eden to guard the way of
the tree of life.
[Genesis 4] TOC
{Gen 4:1-5:32; 1Ch 1:1-4}
4:1 And the man knew Eve his wife and she conceived
and bore Cain and said, I have gotten a man with the help
of Jehovah. 4:2 And again she bore his brother, Abel. And
Abel was a keeper of sheep and Cain worked the ground.
4:3 And it happened in process of time, that Cain
brought an offering to Jehovah of the fruit of the ground.
4:4 And Abel, he also brought of the first-offspring of his
flock and of the fat of it. And Jehovah had respect to Abel
and to his offering,
4:5
but he did not have respect to Cain
and to his offering. And Cain was furious and his
countenance fell.
4:6 And Jehovah said to Cain, Why are you furious?
And why has your countenance fallen? 4:7
If you do well,
will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well, sin
crouches at the door. Its desire will be for you and you
should rule over it.
4:8 And Cain told Abel his brother. And it happened,
when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against
Abel his brother and killed him.
4:9 And Jehovah said to
Cain, Where is Abel your brother? And he said, I do not
know. Am I my brother's keeper?
4:10 And he said, What have you done? The voice of
your brother's blood cries to me from the ground. 4:11 And
now you are cursed from the ground, which has opened its
mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand. 4:12
When you till the ground, it will not again yield to you its
strength. You will be a vagrant and a wanderer on the
earth.
4:13 And Cain said to Jehovah, My punishment is
greater than I can bear.
4:14 Behold, you have driven me
out this day from the face of the ground and I will be hid
from your face and I will be a vagrant and a wanderer in
the earth. And it will happen, that whoever finds me will
kill me. 4:15 And Jehovah said to him, Therefore whoever
kills Cain, vengeance will be taken on himsevenfold. And
Jehovah appointed a sign for Cain, so that anyone who
found him should not strike him.
4:16 And Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah
and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. 4:17 And
Cain knew his wife and she conceived and bore Enoch.
And Cain built a city and called the name of the city after
the name of his son, Enoch.
4:18 And Irad was born to Enoch and Irad fathered
Mehujael and Mehujael fathered Methushael and
Methushael fathered Lamech.
4:19 And Lamech took to him two wives. The name of
the one was Adah and the name of the other was Zillah. 4:20
And Adah bore Jabal. He was the father of those who
dwell in tents and have cattle. 4:21 And his brother's name
was Jubal. He was the father of all those who handle the
harp and pipe. 4:22 And Zillah, she also bore Tubal-cain,
the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron.
And the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
4:23 And Lamech said to his wives, Adah and Zillah,
Hear my voice, you*
, the wives of Lamech, listen to my
speech. Because I have killed a man for wounding me and
a young man for bruising me. 4:24
If Cain will be avenged
seven times, then Lamech seventy-seven times.
4:25 And Adam knew his wife again and she bore a son
and called his name Seth. Because, she said, God has
appointed for me another seed instead of Abel, because
Cain killed him.
4:26 And to Seth, to him there was also
born a son and he called his name Enosh. Then men began
to call upon the name of Jehovah.
[Genesis 5] TOC
{The Genealogy: Adam to Noah's sons. Gen_5:1-32,
1Ch_1:1-4 & Luk_3:36-38.}
5:1
This is the book of the genealogy of Adam. In the
day that God created man, he made him in the likeness of
God, 5:2
he created them male and female and blessed them
and in the day when they were created he called their
name Man.
5:3 And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years and
fathered a son in his own likeness, according to his image
and called his name Seth. 5:4 And the days of Adam were
eight hundred years after he fathered Seth. And he
fathered more sons and daughters. 5:5 And all the days that
Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years and he
died.
5:6 And Seth lived a hundred and five years and
fathered Enosh. 5:7And Seth lived eight hundred and seven
years after he fathered Enosh and fathered more sons and
daughters. 5:8 And all the days of Seth were nine hundred
and twelve years and he died.
5:9 And Enosh lived ninety years and fathered Kenan.
5:10 And Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after
he fathered Kenan and fathered more sons and daughters.
5:11 And all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five
years and he died.
5:12 And Kenan lived seventy years and fathered
Mahalalel.
5:13 And Kenan lived eight hundred and forty
years after he fathered Mahalalel and fathered more sons
and daughters. 5:14 And all the days of Kenan were nine
hundred and ten years and he died.
5:15 And Mahalalel lived sixty-five years and fathered
MLVbible.com GENESIS 9
Jared. 5:16 And Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty
years after he fathered Jared and fathered more sons and
daughters. 5:17 And all the days of Mahalalel were eight
hundred and ninety-five years and he died.
5:18 And Jared lived a hundred and sixty-two years and
fathered Enoch. 5:19 And Jared lived eight hundred years
after he fathered Enoch and fathered more sons and
daughters. 5:20 And all the days ofJared were nine hundred
and sixty-two years and he died.
5:21 And Enoch lived sixty-five years and fathered
Methuselah. 5:22 And Enoch walked with God three
hundred years after he fathered Methuselah and fathered
more sons and daughters. 5:23 And all the days of Enoch
were three hundred and sixty-five years. 5:24 And Enoch
walked with God and he did not die, because God took
him.
5:25 And Methuselah lived a hundred eighty-seven
years and fathered Lamech. 5:26 And Methuselah lived
seven hundred and eighty-two years after he fathered
Lamech and fathered more sons and daughters. 5:27 And all
the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine
years and he died.
5:28And Lamech lived a hundred and eighty-two years
and fathered a son. 5:29 And he called his name Noah,
saying, This one will comfort us in our work and in the
toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah
has cursed. 5:30 And Lamech lived five hundred and
ninety-five years after he fathered Noah and fathered
more sons and daughters. 5:31 And all the days of Lamech
were seven hundred and seventy-seven years and he died.
5:32 And Noah was five hundred years old. And Noah
fathered Shem, Ham and Japheth.
[Genesis 6] TOC
6:1
And it happened, when men began to multiply on
the face of the ground and daughters were born to them,
6:2
that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair. And they took to them wives of all that they
chose. 6:3 And Jehovah said, My Spirit will not strive in
man everlasting, he is flesh in their erring. Yet his days
will be a hundred and twenty years.
6:4 The giants were on the earth in those days. And
also after that, when the sons of God came to the
daughters of men and they bore sons to them, they were
the mighty men who were of old, the men of renown.
6:5 And Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man was
great on the earth and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only continually evil.
6:6 And
Jehovah regretted that he had made man on the earth and
it grieved him in his heart.
6:7 And Jehovah said, I will
destroy man whom I have created from the face of the
ground, from man to beast, to creeping things and birds of
the heavens, because I regret that I have made them.
6:8
But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
6:9 These are the genealogies of Noah. Noah was a
righteous man, perfect in his generations. Noah walked
with God. 6:10 And Noah fathered three sons, Shem, Ham
and Japheth.
6:11 And the earth was corrupt before God and the
earth was filled with violence. 6:12 And God saw the earth
and behold, it was corrupt, because all flesh had corrupted
their way upon the earth.
6:13 And God said to Noah, The end of all flesh has
come before me, because the earth is filled with violence
through them and behold, I will destroy them with the
earth.
6:14 Make yourself an ark of gopher wood. You will
make rooms in the ark and will pitch it inside and outside
with pitch. 6:15 And this is how you will make it: the length
of the ark three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty
cubits and the height of it thirty cubits. 6:16 You will make
a door for the ark and you will finish it to a cubit upward.
And you will set the door of the ark in the side of it and
you will make it with lower, second and third stories.
6:17 And I, behold, I bring the flood of waters upon this
earth, to destroy all flesh, in which is the breath of life,
from under heaven. Everything that is on the earth will
die.
6:18 But I will establish my covenant with you. And
you will come into the ark, you and your sons and your
wife and your sons' wives with you.
6:19 And from every living thing of all flesh, you will
bring into the ark two of every sort, to keep them alive
with you. They will be male and female. 6:20 Of the birds
according to their kind and of the cattle according to their
kind, of every creeping thing of the ground according to its
kind. Two of every sort will come to you, to keep them
alive.
6:21 And you take to you of all food that is eaten and
gather it to yourself and it will be for food for you and for
them.
6:22 Noah did so according to all that God
commanded him and so he did.
[Genesis 7] TOC
{Gen 7:1-10:5; 1Ch 1:5-7}
7:1 And Jehovah said to Noah, Come, you and all your
house into the ark, because I have seen you to be righteous
before me in this generation. 7:2 You will take to you the
male and his female of every clean beast by sevens. And
two of the beasts that are not clean, male and his female.
7:3 Also of the birds of the heavens by sevens, male and
female, to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
7:4 Because after seven days and I will cause it to rain
upon the earth forty days and forty nights and I will blot
from the face of the ground every living thing that I have
made.
7:5 And Noah did according to all that Jehovah
10 GENESIS MLVbible.org
commanded him.
7:6 And Noah was six hundred years old
when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
7:7
And Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons'
wives went in with him, into the ark, because of the
waters of the flood. 7:8 Of clean beasts and of beasts that
are not clean and of birds and of everything that creeps
upon the ground 7:9 went in two by two there into the ark
to Noah, male and female, as God commanded Noah.
7:10 And it happened after the seven days, that the
waters of the flood were upon the earth. 7:11
In the six
hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the
seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all the
fountains of the great deep were broken up and the
windows of heaven were opened. 7:12 And for forty days
and forty nights the rain was upon the earth.
7:13
In the same day Noah and Shem and Ham and
Japheth, the sons of Noah and Noah's wife and the three
wives of his sons with them, entered into the ark,
7:14
they
and every beast according to its kind and all the cattle
according to their kind and every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth according to its kind and every bird
according to its kind, every bird of every wing.
7:15 And they went in, to Noah and into the ark, two
by two of all flesh in which is the breath of life. 7:16 And
those that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
God commanded him. And Jehovah shut him in.
7:17 And the flood was forty days upon the earth. And
the waters increased and bore up the ark and it was lifted
up above the earth. 7:18 And the waters prevailed and
increased greatly upon the earth and the ark went upon the
face of the waters. 7:19 And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth and all the high mountains that
were under the whole heaven were covered, 7:20
fifteen
cubits upward. The waters prevailed and the mountains
were covered.
7:21 And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, from
birds, to cattle, to beasts and every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth and all mankind. 7:22 All died in
whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, of all
that was on the dry land. 7:23 And every living thing was
destroyed that was upon the face of the ground, fromman,
to cattle, to creeping things and birds of the heavens and
they were destroyed from the earth. And only Noah was
left and those who were with him in the ark.
7:24 And the
waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.
[Genesis 8] TOC
8:1 And God remembered Noah and all the beasts and
all the cattle that were with him in the ark. And God made
a wind to pass over the earth and the waters subsided. 8:2
Also the fountains of the deep and the windows of heaven
were stopped and the rain from heaven was restrained. 8:3
And the waters returned from the earth, going and
returning. And after the end of a hundred and fifty days
the waters decreased.
8:4 And the ark rested upon the mountains of Ararat in
the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month.
8:5 And the waters decreased, going and returning until the
tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the
month, the tops of the mountains were seen.
8:6 And it happened at the end of forty days, that Noah
opened the window of the ark which he had made. 8:7 And
he sent out a raven. And it went forth to and fro, until the
waters were dried up from the earth. 8:8
 And he sent forth
a dove from him, to see if the waters had gone away from
the face of the ground. 8:9 But the dove found no rest for
the sole of her foot. And she returned to him to the ark,
because the waters were on the face of the whole earth.
And he put out his hand and took her and brought her in,
to him and into the ark.
8:10 And he stayed yet anotherseven days and again he
sent out the dove out of the ark.
8:11 And the dove came in,
in the evening to him. And behold, in her mouth an olive
leaf plucked off, so Noah knew that the waters had gone
away from the earth.
8:12 And he stayed yet seven other days and sent forth
the dove. And she did not return again to him any more.
8:13 And it happened in the six hundred and first year, in
the first month of the year and the first day of the month,
the waters were dried up from the earth. And Noah
removed the covering of the ark and looked. And behold,
the face of the ground was nearly dried. 8:14 And the earth
was dry in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of
the month.
8:15 And God spoke to Noah, saying,
8:16 Go forth from
the ark, you and your wife and your sons and your sons'
wives with you. 8:17Bring forth with you every living thing
that is with you, of all flesh, both birds and cattle and
every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, that they
may breed abundantly on the earth and be fruitful and
multiply upon the earth.
8:18 And Noah went forth and his sons and his wife and
his sons' wives with him.
8:19 Every beast, every creeping
thing and every bird, whatever moves upon the earth,
according to their families, went forth out of the ark.
8:20 And Noah built an altar to Jehovah and took of
every clean beast and of every clean bird and offered
burnt-offerings on the altar.
8:21 And Jehovah smelled the
sweet aroma. And Jehovah said in his heart, I will not
again curse the ground any more because of man, because
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. I will
not again strike everything living, as I have done. 8:22
While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest and cold
and heat and summer and winter and day and night will
not cease.
[Genesis 9] TOC
MLVbible.com GENESIS 11
9:1 And God blessed Noah and his sons and said to
them, Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. 9:2 And
the fear of you*
 and the dread of you*
 will be upon every
beast of the earth and upon every bird of the heavens, with
all that creeps on the ground and all the fishes of the sea.
They are delivered into your*
hand. 9:3Everymoving thing
that lives will be food for you*
. As the green herb, I have
given you*
all.
9:4 But you* will not eat flesh in its life, that
is its blood.
9:5 And surely I will require your*
blood, the blood of
your
*
lives. I will require it at the hand of every beast.
And I will require the life of man at the hand of man, even
at the hand of every man's brother.
9:6 Whoever sheds
man's blood, his blood will be shed by man. Because he
made man in the image of God. 9:7 And you*
be fruitful
and multiply. Bring forth abundantly on the earth and
multiply on it.
9:8 And God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him,
saying,
9:9 And I, behold, I establish my covenant with
you*
and with your*
seed after you* 9:10
and with every
living creature that is with you*
, the birds, the cattle and
every beast of the earth with you*
, of all that go out of the
ark, even every beast of the earth. 9:11 And I will establish
my covenant with you*
. Neither will all flesh be cut off
any more by the waters of the flood, nor will there be a
flood any more to destroy the earth.
9:12 And God said, This is the sign of the covenant
which I make between me and you*
and every living
creature that is with you*
, everlasting.
9:13
I set my bow in
the cloud and it will be for a sign of a covenant between
me and the earth. 9:14 And it will happen, when I bring a
cloud over the earth, that the bow will be seen in the
cloud. 9:15 And I will remember my covenant, which is
between me and you*
and every living creature of all
flesh. And the waters will no more become a flood to
destroy all flesh. 9:16 And the bow will be in the cloud and
I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting
covenant between God and every living creature of all
flesh that is upon the earth. 9:17 And God said to Noah,
This is the sign of the covenant which I have established
between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
9:18 And the sons of Noah, who went forth from the
ark, were Shem and Ham and Japheth. And Ham is the
father of Canaan. 9:19 These three were the sons of Noah
and from these the whole earth was spread over.
9:20 And Noah began to be a farmer and planted a
vineyard. 9:21 And he drank of the wine and was drunken.
And he was uncovered within his tent.
9:22 And Ham, the
father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father and told
his two brothers outside.
9:23 And Shem and Japheth took a garment and laid it
upon both theirshoulders and went backward and covered
the nakedness of their father. And their faces were
backward and they did not see their father's nakedness.
9:24 And Noah awoke fromhis wine and knew what his
youngest son had done to him.
9:25 And he said, Canaan is
cursed. He will be a servant to his brothers.
9:26 And he said, Praise Jehovah, the God of Shem.
And let Canaan be his servant.
9:27 God enlarge Japheth
and let him dwell in the tents of Shem. And let Canaan be
his servant.
9:28 And Noah lived three hundred and fifty years after
the flood. 9:29 And all the days of Noah were nine hundred
and fifty years and he died.
[Genesis 10] TOC
10:1 Now these are the genealogies of the sons of
Noah, of Shem, Ham and Japheth. And the sons who were
born to them after the flood.
10:2 The sons of Japheth were: Gomer and Magog and
Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.
10:3 And the sons of Gomer were: Ashkenaz and
Riphath and Togarmah. 10:4 And the sons of Javan were:
Elishah and Tarshish, Kittim and Dodanim.
10:5 From these were the islands of the nations divided
in their lands, every man according to his tongue,
according to their families, in their nations.
10:6 And the sons of Ham were: Cush and Mizraim and
Put and Canaan.
{Gen_10:7-20; 1Ch_1:9-16}
10:7 And the sons of Cush were: Seba and Havilah and
Sabtah and Raamah and Sabteca {Sabtechah}. And the sons
of Raamah were: Sheba and Dedan.
10:8 And Cush fathered Nimrod. He began to be a
mighty man on the earth. 10:9 He was a mighty hunter
before Jehovah. Therefore it is said, Like Nimrod a mighty
hunter before Jehovah. 10:10 And the beginning of his
kingdom was Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in
the land of Shinar.
10:11 He went forth out of that land into
Assyria and built Nineveh and Rehoboth-ir and Calah 10:12
and Resen between Nineveh and Calah; that is the great
city.
10:13 And Mizraim fathered Ludim and Anamim and
Lehabimand Naphtuhim
10:14
and Pathrusimand Casluhim
(from where the Philistines went forth) and Caphtorim.
10:15And Canaan fathered Sidon his firstborn and Heth
10:16
and the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgashite
10:17
and the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite 10:18
and
the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite. And
afterward the Canaanite family were spread abroad. 10:19
And the border of the Canaanite was from Sidon, as you
go toward Gerar, to Gaza, as you go toward Sodom and
Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, to Lasha.
10:20 These are the sons of Ham, according to their
families, according to their languages, in their lands, in
their nations.
12 GENESIS MLVbible.org
{Gen_10:21-30; 1Ch_1:17-23}
10:21 And to Shem, the father of all the sons of Eber,
the elder brother of Japheth, sons were also born to him.
10:22 The sons of Shem were: Elam and Asshur and
Arpachshad and Lud and Aram.
10:23 And the sons of
Aram were: Uz and Hul and Gether and Mash. 10:24 And
Arpachshad fathered Shelah and Shelah fathered Eber.
10:25 And to Eber were born two sons. The name of the
one was Peleg. Because in his days the earth was divided.
And his brother's name was Joktan. 10:26 And Joktan
fathered Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and
Jerah 10:27
and Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah 10:28
and Obal
and Abimael and Sheba 10:29
and Ophir and Havilah and
Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. 10:30 And their
dwelling was from Mesha, as you go toward Sephar, the
mountain of the east.
10:31 These are the sons of Shem, according to their
families, according to their languages, in their lands,
according to their nations.
10:32 These are the families of the sons of Noah,
according to their genealogies, in their nations and from
these the nations were divided on the earth after the flood.
[Genesis 11] TOC
11:1 And the whole earth was of one language and of
one speech. 11:2 And it happened, as they traveled east, that
they found a plain in the land of Shinar and they dwelt
there. 11:3 And they said one to another, Come, let us make
brick and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for
stone and they had tar for mortar.
11:4 And they said,
Come, let us build a city for us and a tower and its top in
the heavens. And let us make a name for ourselves, lest
we are scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
11:5 And Jehovah came down to see the city and the
tower, which the sons of man built.
11:6 And Jehovah said, Behold, they are one people
and they have all one language and this is what they begin
to do. And now nothing will be withheld from them,
which they propose to do. 11:7 Come, let Us go down there
and confound their language, that they may not
understand each other's speech.
11:8So Jehovah scattered themabroad fromthere upon
the face of all the earth and they left off building the city.
11:9 Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because
Jehovah confounded the language of all the earth there
and Jehovah scattered them abroad upon the face of all
the earth from there.
{From Shem to Abraham. 1Ch_1:24-27, Gen_11:10-26 &
Luk_3:34-36.}
11:10 These are the genealogies of Shem. Shem was a
hundred years old and fathered Arpachshad two years
after the flood. 11:11 And Shem lived five hundred years
after he fathered Arpachshad and fathered more sons and
daughters.
11:12 And Arpachshad lived thirty-five years and
fathered Shelah. 11:13 And Arpachshad lived four hundred
and three years after he had fathered Shelah and fathered
more sons and daughters.
11:14
 And Shelah lived thirty years and fathered Eber.
11:15 And Shelah lived four hundred and three years after he
fathered Eber and he fathered more sons and daughters.
11:16 And Eber lived thirty-four years and fathered
Peleg.
11:17 And Eber lived four hundred and thirty years
after he fathered Peleg and fathered more sons and
daughters.
11:18 And Peleg lived thirty years and fathered Reu. 11:19
And Peleg lived two hundred and nine years after he
fathered Reu and fathered more sons and daughters.
11:20 And Reu lived thirty-two years and fathered
Serug.
11:21 And Reu lived two hundred and seven years
after he fathered Serug and fathered more sons and
daughters.
11:22 And Serug lived thirty years and fathered Nahor.
11:23 And Serug lived two hundred years after he fathered
Nahor and fathered more sons and daughters.
11:24 And Nahor lived twenty-nine years and fathered
Terah. 11:25 And Nahor lived a hundred and nineteen years
after he fathered Terah and fathered more sons and
daughters.
11:26 And Terah lived seventy years and fathered
Abram, Nahor and Haran.
11:27 Now these are the genealogies of Terah were:
Terah fathered Abram, Nahor and Haran. And Haran
fathered Lot.
11:28 And Haran died before his father Terah
in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldeans.
11:29 And Abram and Nahor took wives to themselves.
The name of Abram's wife was Sarai and the name of
Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of
Milcah and the father of Iscah. 11:30 And Sarai was barren;
she had no child.
11:31 And Terah took Abram his son and Lot the son of
Haran, his son's son and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son
Abram's wife. And they went forth with them from Ur of
the Chaldeans, to go into the land of Canaan. And they
came to Haran and dwelt there. 11:32 And the days of Terah
were two hundred and five years and Terah died in Haran.
[Genesis 12] TOC
12:1 Now Jehovah said to Abram, Go out of your
country and from your kindred and from your father's
house, to the land that I will show you. 12:2 And I will
make of you a great nation and I will bless you and make
your name great and you will be a blessing.
12:3 And I will
bless those who bless you and he who curses you I will
curse. And all the families of the earth will be blessed in
you.
MLVbible.com GENESIS 13
12:4 So Abram went as Jehovah had spoken to him and
Lot went with him. And Abram was a son of seventy-five
years when he departed out of Haran. 12:5 And Abram took
Sarai his wife and Lot his brother's son and all their
substance that they had gathered and the souls that they
had gotten in Haran and they went forth to go into the
land of Canaan. And they came into the land of Canaan.
12:6 And Abram passed through the land to the place of
Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. And the Canaanite was in
the land then.
12:7 And Jehovah appeared to Abram and said, I will
give this land to your seed. And he built an altar there to
Jehovah, who appeared to him. 12:8 And he moved from
there to the mountain on the east of Bethel and pitched his
tent, having Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. And he
built an altar there to Jehovah and called upon the name
ofJehovah. 12:9 And Abram traveled, going on still toward
the South.
12:10
 And there was a famine in the land. And Abram
went down into Egypt to journey there, because the
famine wassevere in the land. 12:11 And it happened, when
he came near to enter into Egypt, that he said to Sarai his
wife, Behold, I beseech you, I know that you are a fair
woman to look upon. 12:12 And it will happen, when the
Egyptians willsee you, that they will say, This is his wife.
And they will kill me, but they will let you live. 12:13
I
beseech you, say that you are my sister, that it may be
well with me for your sake and that my soul may live
because of you.
12:14 And it happened, that, when Abram came into
Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very
fair.
12:15 And the princes of Pharaoh saw her and praised
her to Pharaoh. And the woman was taken into Pharaoh's
house. 12:16 And he dealt well with Abram for her sake.
And he had sheep and oxen and male-donkeys and menservants and maid-servants and female-donkeys and
camels.
12:17 And Jehovah struck Pharaoh and his house with
great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife. 12:18 And
Pharaoh called Abramand said, What isthis that you have
done to me? Why did you not tell me that she is your
wife? 12:19 Why did you say, She is my sister, so that I took
her to be my wife? Now therefore behold your wife. Take
her and go your way.
12:20 And Pharaoh commanded his
men concerning him. And they brought him on the way
and his wife and all that he had.
[Genesis 13] TOC
13:1 And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife
and all that he had and Lot with him, into the South. 13:2
And Abram was very heavy in riches, in cattle, in silver
and in gold. {Coins did not exist at the time.} 13:3 And he
went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel, to the
place where his tent had been at the beginning, between
Bethel and Ai,
13:4
to the place of the altar, which he had
made there at first. And Abram called on the name of
Jehovah there.
13:5 And Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks
and herds and tents. 13:6 And the land was not able to bear
them, that they might dwell together. Because their
substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
13:7 And there was a strife between the herdsmen of
Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of Lot's cattle. And the
Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelt in the land then.
13:8 And Abram said to Lot, I beseech you, let there be
no strife between me and you and between my herdsmen
and your herdsmen, because we are men– brothers. 13:9
Is
not the whole land before you? I beseech you, separate
yourself from me. If you go to the left hand, then I will go
to the right. Or if you go to the right hand, then I will go to
the left.
13:10 And Lot lifted up his eyes and beheld all the Plain
of the Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere (this
was before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah) like
the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as you go to
Zoar.
13:11 So Lot chose for himself all the Plain of the
Jordan. And Lot traveled east and they separated
themselves the one from the other.
13:12 Abram dwelt in the
land of Canaan. And Lot dwelt in the cities of the Plain
and moved his tent as far as Sodom.
13:13 Now the men of
Sodomwere exceedingly wicked and greatsinners against
Jehovah.
13:14 And Jehovah said to Abram, after Lot was
separated from him, Lift up your eyes now and look from
the place where you are, northward and southward and
eastward and westward. 13:15 Because all the land which
you see, to you I will give it and to your seed everlasting.
13:16 And I will make your seed like the dust of the earth.
So that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then
may your seed also be numbered. 13:17 Arise, walk through
the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it, because
I will give it to you.
13:18 And Abram moved his tent and came and dwelt
by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron and built an
altar there to Jehovah.
[Genesis 14] TOC
14:1 And it happened in the days of Amraphel King of
Shinar, Arioch King of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer King of
Elam and Tidal King of Goiim,
14:2
that they made war
with Bera King of Sodom and with Birsha King of
Gomorrah, with Shinab King of Admah and with
Shemeber King of Zeboiim and the King of Bela (which
is Zoar).
14:3 All these joined together in the valley of Siddim
14 GENESIS MLVbible.org
(which isthe Salt Sea).
14:4 They served Chedorlaomer for
twelve years and in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 14:5
And in the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer came and the
kings that were with him and struck the Rephaim {giants}
in Ashteroth-karnaim and the Zuzim in Ham and the
Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim 14:6
and the Horites on their
Mount Seir, to El-paran, which is by the wilderness. 14:7
And they returned and came to En-mishpat (which is
Kadesh) and struck all the country of the Amalekites and
also the Amorites, who dwelt in Hazazon-tamar.
14:8 Andthe King of Sodom went out there and the
King of Gomorrah and the King of Admah and the King
of Zeboiim and the King of Bela (which is Zoar) and they
arranged for battle against them in the valley of Siddim,
14:9
against Chedorlaomer King of Elam and Tidal King of
Goiim and Amraphel King of Shinar and Arioch King of
Ellasar; four kings against the five kings.
14:10 Now the valley of Siddim was full of tar pits.
And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and they fell
there. And those who remained fled to the mountain. 14:11
And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and
all their food and went their way.
14:12 And they took Lot,
Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom and his goods
and departed.
14:13 And some man came who had escaped and told
Abram the Hebrew. Now he dwelt by the oaks of Mamre
the Amorite, brother of Eshcol and brother of Aner. And
these were allies with Abram.
14:14 And when Abram heard that his brother was
taken captive, he led out his trained men, born in his
house, three hundred and eighteen of them and pursued as
far as Dan.
14:15 And he divided himself against them by
night, he and his servants and struck them and pursued
them to Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
14:16 And he brought back all the goods and also brought
back his brother Lot and his goods and also the women
and the people.
14:17 And the King of Sodom went out to meet him,
after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and
the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh
(what is the King's Valley).
14:18 And Melchizedek King of Salem brought out
bread and wine. And he was priest of God Most High. 14:19
And he blessed him and said, Abram be blessed from God
Most High, possessor of heaven and earth. 14:20 And praise
God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into
your hand. And Abram gave him a tenth of all.
14:21 And the King of Sodom said to Abram, Give me
the men and take the goods for yourself. 14:22 And Abram
said to the King of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand to
Jehovah, God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23
that I will not take a thread nor a shoe latchet nor
anything that is yours, lest you should say, I have made
Abram rich, 14:24
except only what the young men have
eaten and the portion of the men who went with me, Aner,
Eshcol and Mamre. Let them take their portion.
[Genesis 15] TOC
15:1 After these things the word of Jehovah came to
Abram in a vision, saying, Do not fear, Abram. I am your
shield, your exceedingly great reward.
15:2 And Abram said, O Lord Jehovah, what will you
give me, since I go childless. And he who will be
possessor of my house is Eliezer of Damascus? 15:3 And
Abram said, Behold, you have given no seed to me. And
behold, a man born in my house is my heir.
15:4 And behold, the word of Jehovah came to him,
saying, This man will not be your heir, but he who will
come forth out of your own guts will be your heir.
15:5 And he brought him outside and said, Look now
toward heaven and number the stars, if you are able to
number them. And he said to him, So your seed will be. 15:6
And he believed in Jehovah and he reckoned it to him for
righteousness.
15:7 And he said to him, I am Jehovah who brought you
out of Ur of the Chaldeans, to give you this land to inherit
it.
15:8 And he said, O Lord Jehovah, how will I know that
I will inherit it? 15:9 And he said to him, Take a heifer three
years old for me and a female-goat three years old and a
ram three years old and a turtle dove and a young pigeon.
15:10 And he took all these for him and divided them in
the midst and laid each half opposite the other. But he did
not divide the birds. 15:11 And the birds of prey came down
upon the carcasses and Abram drove them away.
15:12 And
when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon
Abram. And behold, a horror of great darkness fell upon
him.
15:13 And God said to Abram, Know of a certainty that
your seed will be travelers in a land that is not theirs. And
your seed will serve them and they will mistreat them for
four hundred years. 15:14 And I will also judge that nation,
whom they will serve and afterward they will come out
with great substance. 15:15 But you will go to your fathers
in peace; you will be buried at a good old age. 15:16 And
they will come here again in the fourth generation,
because the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.
15:17 And it happened, that, when the sun went down
and it was dark, behold, there appeared a smoking furnace
and a flaming torch that passed between these pieces.
15:18
In that day Jehovah made a covenant with Abram,
saying, To your seed I have given this land, from the river
of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates: 15:19
the
Kenite and the Kenizzite and the Kadmonite
15:20
and the
Hittite and the Perizzite and the Rephaim
15:21
and the
Amorite and the Canaanite and the Girgashite and the
Jebusite.
MLVbible.com GENESIS 15
[Genesis 16] TOC
16:1 Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no children.
And she had a handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was
Hagar.
16:2 And Saraisaid to Abram, Behold now, Jehovah
has restrained me from bearing children. I beseech you,
go in to my handmaid. Perhaps I will be built up from her.
And Abram listened to the voice of Sarai.
16:3 And Sarai,
Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid and
gave her to Abram, her husband, to be his wife, after
Abram had dwelt in the land of Canaan for ten years.
16:4 And he went in to Hagar and she conceived. And
when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was
despised in her eyes. 16:5 And Sarai said to Abram, My
wrong be upon you. I gave my handmaid into your bosom
and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised
in her eyes. Jehovah judge between me and you. 16:6 But
Abram said to Sarai, Behold, your maid is in your hand,
do to her what is good in your eyes. And Sarai mistreated
her and she fled from her face.
16:7 And the messenger of Jehovah found her by a
fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the
way to Shur.
16:8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's handmaid,
from where have you come? And where are you going?
And she said, I am fleeing from the face of my
mistress Sarai.
16:9 And the messenger of Jehovah said to her, Return
to your mistress and submit yourself under her hands. 16:10
And the messenger of Jehovah said to her, I will greatly
multiply your seed, that it will not be numbered for a
multitude.
16:11 And the messenger of Jehovah said to her,
Behold, you are with child and will bear a son and you
will call his name Ishmael, because Jehovah has heard
your affliction. 16:12 And he will be a wild donkey among
men, his hand against every man and every man's hand
against him and he will dwell in the presence of all his
brothers.
16:13 And she called the name of Jehovah who spoke
to her, You are a God who sees, because she said, Have
I even looked behind him, who sees me here?
16:14
Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi {The Living
One Who Sees Me}. Behold, it is between Kadesh and
Bered.
16:15 And Hagar bore Abram a son. And Abram called
the name of his son, Ishmael, whom Hagar bore. 16:16 And
Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael
to Abram.
[Genesis 17] TOC
17:1 And when Abram was ninety-nine years old,
Jehovah appeared to Abram and said to him, I am God
Almighty, walk before me and you will be perfect.
17:2
And I will make my covenant between you and me and
will multiply you exceedingly.
17:3 And Abram fell on his face. And God talked with
him, saying,
17:4 As for me, behold, my covenant is with
you and you will be the father of a multitude of nations.
17:5 Neither will your name any more be called Abram, but
your name will be Abraham, because I have made you the
father of a multitude of nations. 17:6 And I will make you
exceedingly fruitful. And I will make nations of you and
kings will come out of you.
17:7 And I will establish my covenant between me and
you and your seed after you throughout their generations
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to you and to your
seed after you. 17:8 And I will give to you and to your seed
after you, the land of your travels, all the land of Canaan
for an everlasting possession and I will be their God.
17:9 And God said to Abraham, And as for you, you
will keep my covenant, you and your seed after you
throughout their generations. 17:10 This is my covenant,
which you* will keep, between me and you*
and your seed
after you; every male among you* will be circumcised. 17:11
And you* will be circumcised in the flesh of your*
foreskin
and it will be a sign of a covenant between me and you*
.
17:12 And he who is eight days old will be circumcised
among you*
, every male throughout your*
generations: he
who is born in the house, or bought with money of any
foreigner that is not of your seed. 17:13 He who is born in
your house and he who is bought with your money, must
be circumcised. And my covenant will be in your*
flesh for
an everlasting covenant.
17:14 And the uncircumcised male
who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that
soul will be cut off from his people; he has broken my
covenant.
17:15 And God said to Abraham, As for Sarai your
wife, you will not call her name Sarai, because her name
will be Sarah. 17:16 And I will bless her. And moreover I
will give you a son by her. Yes, I will bless her and she
will be a mother of nations; kings of peoples will be by
her.
17:17 Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed and
said in his heart, Shall a child be born to him who is a
hundred years old? And will Sarah, who is ninety years
old, bear? 17:18 And Abraham said to God, If only Ishmael
might live before you!
17:19 And God said, No, but Sarah your wife will bear
you a son and you will call his name Isaac. And I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting
covenant for his seed after him.
17:20 And as for Ishmael, I
have heard you. Behold, I have blessed him and will make
him fruitful and will multiply him exceedingly. He will
father twelve princes and I will make him a great nation.
17:21 But I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom
Sarah will bear to you at this set time in the next year.
17:22
And he left off talking with him and God went up from
16 GENESIS MLVbible.org
Abraham.
17:23 And Abraham took Ishmael his son and all who
were born in his house and all who were bought with his
money, every male among the men of Abraham's house
and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the same
day, as God had said to him.
17:24 And Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he
was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 17:25 And
Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 17:26
In the same
day Abraham was circumcised and Ishmael his son.
17:27
And all the men of his house, those born in the house and
those bought with money from a foreigner, were
circumcised with him.
[Genesis 18] TOC
18:1 And Jehovah appeared to him by the oaks of
Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day.
18:2
And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold, three
men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet
them from the tent door and bowed himself to the earth 18:3
and said, My Lord, if I have now found favor in your
sight, I beseech you, do not pass away from your servant.
18:4 Now let a little water be fetched and wash your*
feet
and rest yourselves under the tree. 18:5 And I will fetch a
morsel of bread and strengthen your*
heart. After that,
you* will pass on, because you*
came to your*
servant.
And they said, Do so, as you have said.
18:6 And Abraham hastened into the tent to Sarah and
said, Quickly, prepare three measures of fine meal, knead
it and make cakes. 18:7 And Abraham ran to the herd and
fetched a calf, tender and good and gave it to the servant.
And he hastened to dress it.
18:8 And he took butter and
milk and the calf which he had dressed and set it before
them. And he stood by them under the tree and they ate.
18:9 And they said to him, Where is Sarah your wife?
And he said, Behold, in the tent.
18:10 And he said, I will
certainly return to you when the season comes round, and
behold, Sarah your wife will have a son. And Sarah heard
in the tent door, which was behind him.
18:11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well
stricken in age. It had ceased to be with Sarah after the
manner of women. 18:12 And Sarah laughed within herself,
saying, After I have become old shall I have pleasure from
my lord who is also old?
18:13 And Jehovah said to Abraham, Why did Sarah
laugh, saying, Shall I who am old certainly bear a child?
18:14
Is anything too hard for Jehovah? At the set time I
will return to you, when the season comes round and
Sarah will have a son.
18:15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I did not laugh,
because she was afraid.
And he said, No, but you did laugh.
18:16 And the men rose up from there and looked
toward Sodom. And Abraham went with them to bring
them on the way.
18:17 And Jehovah said, Shall I hide from
Abraham what I do, 18:18
since Abraham will surely
become a great and mighty nation and all the nations of
the earth will be blessed in him? 18:19 Because I have
known him, to the end that he may command his children
and his household after him, that they may keep the way
ofJehovah, to do righteousness and justice, to the end that
Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he has spoken of
him.
18:20 And Jehovah said, Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great and because their sin is very grievous,
18:21
I will go down now and see whether they have done
according to the cry which comes to me. And if not, I will
know.
18:22
 And the men turned from there and went toward
Sodom, but Abraham yet stood before Jehovah. 18:23 And
Abraham drew near and said, Will you consume righteous
men with wicked men? 18:24 Perhaps there are fifty
righteous men within the city. Will you consume and not
spare the place for the fifty righteous men that are in it?
18:25 Far be it from you to do such a thing, to kill a
righteous man with a wicked man, that so the righteous
man should be as the wicked man. Far be it from you.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
18:26 And Jehovah said, If I find in Sodom fifty
righteous men within the city, then I will spare all the
place for theirsake. 18:27 And Abraham answered and said,
Behold now, I have taken it upon me to speak to the Lord,
who am I but dust and ashes.
18:28
 Perhaps there will lack five of the fifty righteous
men. Will you destroy all the city for lack of five? And he
said, I will not destroy it, if I find forty-five there.
18:29 And he spoke to him yet again and said, Perhaps
there will be forty found there. And he said, I will not do
it for the forty's sake.
18:30 And he said, Oh let the Lord not be furious and I
will speak. Perhaps there will be thirty found there. And
he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
18:31 And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me
to speak to the Lord. Perhaps there will be twenty found
there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the twenty's
sake.
18:32 And he said, Oh let the Lord not be furious and I
will speak yet but this once. Perhaps ten will be found
there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.
18:33 And Jehovah went his way as soon as he had left off
speaking with Abraham and Abraham returned to his
place.
[Genesis 19] TOC
19:1 And the two messengers came to Sodom in the
MLVbible.com GENESIS 17
evening and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom. And Lot saw
them and rose up to meet them. And he bowed himself
with his face to the earth 19:2
and he said, Behold now, my
lords, I beseech you*
, turn aside into your*
servant's house
and abide all night and wash your*
feet and you* will rise
up early and go on your*
 way. And they said, No, but we
will abide in the street all night.
19:3 And he urged them greatly. And they turned aside
to him and entered into his house. And he made a feast for
them and baked unleavened bread and they ate.
19:4 But before they lay down, the men of the city, the
men of Sodom, encompassed themselves around the
house, both young and old, all the people from every
quarter.
19:5 And they called to Lot and said to him, Where
are the men who came to you this night? Bring them out
to us, that we may know them.
19:6 And Lot went out to them to the doorway and shut
the door after him.
19:7 And he said, I beseech you*
, my
brothers, do not act so wickedly.
 19:8 Behold now, I have
two daughters who have not known a man. I beseech you*
,
let me bring them out to you*
and you*
do to them as is
good in your*
eyes. Only do nothing to these men,
inasmuch as they have come under the shadow of my
roof.
19:9 And they said, Stand back. And they said, This
one came in to journey and he will be a judge? Now we
will deal worse with you, than with them. And they
pressed greatly upon the man, against Lot and drew near
to break the door.
19:10 But the men put forth their hand and brought Lot
to them into the house and shut the door.
19:11 And they
struck the men who were at the doorway of the house with
blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied
themselves trying to find the door.
19:12 And the men said to Lot, Have you any here in
Sodom besides those in the house? Take your son-in-law
and yoursons and your daughters and whomever you have
in the city and bring them out of the place. 19:13 Because
we will destroy this place, because the cry of them has
been great before Jehovah. And Jehovah has sent us to
destroy it.
19:14 And Lot went out and spoke to his sons in-law,
who married his daughters and said, Get up, you*
get out
of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city. But
he seemed as a man jesting, to his sons-in-law.
19:15 And when the morning arose, then the
messengers hurried Lot, saying, Arise, take your wife and
your two daughters who are found here, lest you are
consumed in the iniquity of the city.
19:16 But he lingered.
And the men laid hold upon his hand and upon the hand
of his wife and upon the hand of his two daughters,
because Jehovah was being merciful to him and they
brought him forth and set him outside the city.
19:17 And it happened, when they had brought them
outside, that he said, Escape for your life. Do not look
behind you, neither will you stay in all the Plain. Escape
to the mountain, lest you are consumed.
19:18 And Lot said to them, Oh, not so, my lord. 19:19
Behold now, your servant has found favor in your sight
and you have magnified your loving kindness, which you
have shown to me in saving my life and I cannot escape to
the mountain, lest evil overtake me and I die. 19:20
 Behold
now, this city is near to flee to and it is a little one. Oh let
me escape there (is it not a little one?) and my soul will
live.
19:21
 And he said to him, Behold, I have lifted up you
concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the
city of which you have spoken. 19:22 You hasten, escape
there, because I cannot do anything till you have come
there. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
19:23 The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot came
to Zoar.
19:24 Then Jehovah rained brimstone and fire upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrah, from Jehovah out of heaven.
19:25 And he overthrew those cities and all the Plain and all
the inhabitants of the cities and what grew upon the
ground. 19:26But his wife looked back frombehind himand
she became a pillar of salt.
19:27 And Abraham got up early in the morning to the
place where he had stood before the face of Jehovah. 19:28
And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and toward
all the land of the Plain and saw it. And behold, the smoke
of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.
19:29 And it happened, when God destroyed the cities
of the Plain, that God remembered Abraham and that he
sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he
overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt.
19:30 And Lot went
up out of Zoar and dwelt in the mountain and his two
daughters with him, because he feared to dwell in Zoar.
And he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
19:31 And the firstborn said to the younger, Our father
is old and there is not a man on the earth to come in to us
after the manner of all the earth. 19:32 Come, let us make
our father drink wine and we will lie with him, that we
may preserve seed by our father.
19:33 And they made their
father drink wine that night. And the firstborn went in and
lay with her father. And he did not know when she lay
down, nor when she arose.
19:34 And it happened on the day after, that the
firstborn said to the younger, Behold, I lay with my father
last night. Let us make him drink wine this night also and
you go in and lie with him, that we may preserve seed by
our father.
19:35 And they made their father drink wine that
night also. And the younger arose and lay with him. And
he did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
19:36 And both the daughters of Lot were with child by
their father.
19:37 And the firstborn bore a son and called his
name Moab. He is the father of the Moabites to this day.
19:38 And the younger, she also bore a son and called his
18 GENESIS MLVbible.org
name Ben-ammi. The same is the father of the sons of
Ammon to this day.
[Genesis 20] TOC
20:1 And Abraham traveled from there toward the land
of the South and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur. And he
traveled in Gerar.
20:2 And Abraham said of Sarah his
wife, She is my sister. And Abimelech King of Gerar sent
and took Sarah. 20:3 But God came to Abimelech in a
dream of the night and said to him, Behold, you are but a
dead man, over the woman whom you have taken; she is
a man's wife.
20:4 Now Abimelech had not come near her. And he
said, Lord, will you kill even a righteous nation? 20:5
 Did
he not himself say to me, She is my sister? And she, even
she herself said, He is my brother. In the integrity of my
heart and the innocence of my hands I have done this.
20:6 And God said to him in the dream, Yes, I know
that in the integrity of your heart you have done this. And
I also withheld you from sinning against me. Therefore I
did not allow you to touch her.
20:7 Now therefore restore
the man's wife. Because he is a prophet and he will pray
for you and you will live. And if you do not restore her,
you will know that you will surely die, you and all who
are yours.
20:8 And Abimelech rose early in the morning and
called all his servants and told all these things in their
ears. And the men were exceedingly afraid.
20:9 Then Abimelech called Abraham and said to him,
What have you done to us? And in what way have Isinned
against you, that you have brought such a great sin on me
and on my kingdom? You have done deeds to me that
ought not to be done. 20:10 And Abimelech said to
Abraham, What did you see, that you have done this
thing?
20:11 And Abraham said, Because Ithought, Surely the
fear of God is not in this place and they will kill me
because of my wife. 20:12 And moreover she is indeed my
sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of
my mother and she became my wife. 20:13 And it happened,
when God caused me to wander from my father's house,
that I said to her, This is your kindness which you will
show to me. At every place where we will come, say of
me, He is my brother.
20:14 And Abimelech took sheep and oxen and menservants and women-servants and gave them to Abraham
and restored to him Sarah his wife. 20:15 And Abimelech
said, Behold, my land is before you. Dwell where it
pleases you. 20:16 And to Sarah he said, Behold, I have
given your brother a thousand pieces of silver. Behold, it
is for you a covering of the eyes to all who are with you.
And you are correct in regard to all this.
20:17 And Abraham prayed to God and God healed
Abimelech and his wife and his maid-servants. And they
bore children.
20:18 Because Jehovah had closed up fast all
the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah,
Abraham's wife.
[Genesis 21] TOC
21:1 And Jehovah visited Sarah as he had said and
Jehovah did to Sarah as he had spoken.
21:2 And Sarah
conceived and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the
set time of which God had spoken to him.
21:3 And
Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him,
Isaac, whom Sarah bore to him.
21:4 And Abraham
circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as
God had commanded him.
21:5 And Abraham was a
hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born to him.
21:6 And Sarah said, God has made me to laugh.
Everyone who hears will laugh with me. 21:7 And she said,
Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarah should nurse
sons? Because I have borne him a son in his old age.
{Gen_21:8-23:20; Gen_11:32; Gen_24:1-67}
21:8 And the child grew and was weaned. And
Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was
weaned. 21:9 And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian,
whom she had borne to Abraham, mocking.
21:10 Therefore
she said to Abraham, Cast out this handmaid and her son.
Because the son of this handmaid will not be heir with my
son, that is with Isaac. 21:11 And the thing was very
grievous in Abraham's sight on account of his son.
21:12 And God said to Abraham, Do not let it be
grievous in your sight because of the lad and because of
your handmaid. In all that Sarah says to you, listen to her
voice. Because in Isaac will your seed be called. 21:13 And
I will also make a nation of the son of the handmaid,
because he is your seed.
21:14 And Abraham rose up early in the morning and
took bread and a skin-container of water and gave them to
Hagar, putting them on her shoulder and the child and sent
her away. And she departed and wandered in the
wilderness of Beer-sheba. 21:15 And the water in the skincontainer was spent and she cast the child under one of the
shrubs.
21:16 And she went and sat herself down opposite
him a good way off, as if it was a bowshot away. Because
she said, Do not let me look upon the death of the child.
And she sat opposite him and lifted up her voice and wept.
21:17 And God heard the voice of the lad. And the
messenger of God called to Hagar out of heaven and said
to her, What troubles you, Hagar? Do not fear, because
God has heard the voice of the lad where he is.
21:18 Arise,
lift up the lad and hold him in your hand, because I will
make him a great nation. 21:19 And God opened her eyes
and she saw a well of water. And she went and filled the
skin-container with water and gave the lad a drink.
21:20 And God was with the lad and he grew. And he
dwelt in the wilderness and became an archer as he grew
MLVbible.com GENESIS 19
up. 21:21 And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran. And his
mother took a wife out of the land of Egypt for him.
21:22 And it happened at that time, that Abimelech and
Phicol the captain of his army spoke to Abraham, saying,
God is with you in all that you do. 21:23 Now therefore
swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely
with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son. But
according to the kindness that I have done to you, you will
do to me and to the land in which you have traveled. 21:24
And Abraham said, I will swear.
21:25 And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of
the well of water which Abimelech's servants had
violently taken away. 21:26 And Abimelech said, I do not
know who has done this thing, neither did you tell me, nor
yet did I hear of it, except today.
21:27 And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave
them to Abimelech. And the two made a covenant.
21:28
And Abraham set seven ewe-lambs of the flock by
themselves. 21:29 And Abimelech said to Abraham, What
do these seven ewe-lambs mean which you have set by
themselves? 21:30 And he said, Because these seven ewelambs you will take from my hand, that it may be a
witness to me, that I have dug this well. 21:31 Therefore he
called that place Beer-sheba, because both of them swore
there.
21:32 So they cut a covenant at Beer-sheba. And
Abimelech rose up and Phicol the captain of his army and
they returned into the land of the Philistines. 21:33 And
Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beer-sheba and called
on the name of Jehovah, the Everlasting God, there. 21:34
And Abraham traveled in the land of the Philistines many
days.
[Genesis 22] TOC
22:1 And it happened after these things, that God
proved Abraham and said to him, Abraham. And he said,
Behold, here I am.
22:2 And he said, Take your son now,
your only son, Isaac, whom you love and go into the land
of Moriah. And offer him there for a burnt-offering upon
one of the mountains which I will tell you of.
22:3 And Abraham rose early in the morning and
saddled his donkey and took two of his young men with
him and Isaac his son. And he split the wood for the
burnt-offering and rose up and went to the place of which
God had told him.
22:4 On the third day Abraham lifted up
his eyes and saw the place afar off.
22:5 And Abraham said
to his young men, You*
abide here with the donkey and I
and the lad will go over there and we will worship and
come back again to you*
.
22:6 And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering
and laid it upon Isaac his son. And he took the fire and the
knife in his hand. And both of them went together.
22:7
 And Isaac spoke to Abraham his father and said,
My father.
And he said, Behold, here I am, my son.
And he said, Behold, the fire and the wood, but where
is the lamb for a burnt-offering? 22:8 And Abraham said,
God himself will see to the lamb for a burnt-offering, my
son. So they went both of them together.
22:9 And they came to the place which God had told
him of. And Abraham built the altar there and arranged the
wood and bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar,
upon the wood. 22:10
 And Abraham stretched out his hand
and took the knife to kill his son.
22:11
 And the messenger of Jehovah called to him out
of heaven and said, Abraham, Abraham.
And he said, Behold, here I am.
22:12 And he said, Do not lay your hand upon the lad,
neither do you anything to him. Because now I know that
you fear God, since you have not withheld your son, your
only son, from me.
22:13
 And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and
behold, behind him a ram caught in the thicket by his
horns. And Abraham went and took the ram and offered
him up for a burnt-offering instead of his son.
22:14 And
Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh
{Jehovah Sees}. As it is said to this day, It will be provided
in the mountain of Jehovah.
22:15 And the messenger ofJehovah called to Abraham
a second time out of heaven 22:16
and said, I have sworn by
myself, says Jehovah, because you have done this thing
and have not withheld your son, your only son, 22:17
that in
blessing I will bless you and in multiplying I will multiply
your seed as the stars of the heavens and as the sand which
is upon the sea _shore and your seed will possess the gate
of his enemies 22:18
and all the nations of the earth will
bless themselves in your seed, because you have obeyed
my voice.
22:19 So Abraham returned to his young men. And they
rose up and went together to Beer-sheba. And Abraham
dwelt at Beer-sheba. 22:20 And it happened after these
things, that it was told to Abraham, saying, Behold,
Milcah, she has also borne sons to your brother Nahor:
22:21
Uz his first born and Buz his brother and Kemuel the
father of Aram,
22:22
and Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and
Jidlaph and Bethuel.
22:23 And Bethuel fathered Rebekah.
These eight Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
22:24
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she also
bore Tebah and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.
[Genesis 23] TOC
23:1 And the life of Sarah was a hundred and twentyseven years. These were the years of the life of Sarah. 23:2
And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba {The City of Arba} (what is
Hebron), in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah and to weep for her.
20 GENESIS MLVbible.org
23:3 And Abraham rose up from before his dead and
spoke to the sons of Heth, saying,
23:4
I am a stranger and
a traveler with you*
. Give me a burial possession with
you*
, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
23:5 And the sons of Heth answered Abraham, saying
to him,
23:6 Hear us, my lord. You are a prince of God
among us. Bury your dead in our choice sepulchers. None
of us will withhold his sepulcher from you, butso that you
may bury your dead.
23:7 And Abraham rose up and bowed himself to the
people of the land, and to the sons of Heth. 23:8 And he
spoke with them, saying, If it is your* mind that I should
bury my dead out of my sight, hear me and entreat for me
to Ephron the son of Zohar,
23:9
that he may give me the
cave of Machpelah, which he has, which is in the end of
his field. Let him give it to me for the full price for a
burial possession in the midst of you*
.
23:10 Now Ephron was sitting in the midst of the sons
of Heth. And Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the
audience of the sons of Heth, even of all who went in at
the gate of his city, saying,
23:11 No, my lord, hear me. I
give you the field. And the cave that is in it, I give it to
you. I give it to you in the presence of the sons of my
people. Bury your dead.
23:12 And Abraham bowed himself down before the
people of the land. 23:13 And he spoke to Ephron in the
audience of the people of the land, saying, But, I beseech
you, if you would hear me. I will give the price of the
field. Take it from me and I will bury my dead there.
23:14 And Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
23:15 My lord, listen to me. A piece of land worth four
hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and
you? Therefore bury your dead.
23:16 And Abraham listened to Ephron. And Abraham
weighed the silver to Ephron that he had named in the
audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of
silver, what passes with the merchant. {the typical selling
price} 23:17 So the field of Ephron, which was in
Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field and the
cave which was in it and all the trees that were in the
field, that were in all the border of it all around, were
made sure 23:18
to Abraham for a possession in the
presence of the sons of Heth, before all who went in at the
gate of his city.
23:19 And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in
the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (what is
Hebron), in the land of Canaan. 23:20 And the field and the
cave that is in it, were made sure to Abraham for a burial
possession by the sons of Heth.
[Genesis 24] TOC
24:1
 And Abraham was old, well stricken in age. And
Jehovah had blessed Abraham in all things. 24:2 And
Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who
ruled over all that he had, I beseech you, put your hand
under my thigh. 24:3 And I will make you swear by
Jehovah, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that
you will not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, among whom I dwell.
24:4 But you will go to
my country and to my kindred and take a wife for my son
Isaac.
24:5 And the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman
will not be willing to follow me to this land. Must I bring
your son again to the land from where you came? 24:6 And
Abraham said to him, You beware that you not bring my
son there again. 24:7
Jehovah, the God of heaven, who took
me from my father's house and from the land of my
nativity and who spoke to me and who swore to me,
saying, To your seed I will give this land. He will send his
messenger before you and you will take a wife for my son
from there.
24:8 And if the woman is not willing to follow you,
then you will be clear from this my oath. Only you will not
bring my son there again. 24:9 And the servant put his hand
under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him
concerning this matter.
24:10 And the servant took ten camels, of the camels of
his master and departed, having all good things of his
master's in his hand. And he arose and went to
Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor.
24:11 And he made the
camels to kneel down outside the city by the well of water
at the time of evening, the time that women go out to draw
water.
24:12 And he said, O Jehovah, the God of my master
Abraham, I beseech you, cause her to meet before me this
day and show kindness to my master Abraham.
24:13
Behold, I am standing by the fountain of water. And the
daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw
water.
24:14 And let it happen, that the maiden to whom I
will say, I beseech you, let down your pitcher, that I may
drink.
And she will say, Drink and I will also give your
camels drink. Let it be her, the one you have appointed for
your servant Isaac. And I will know that you have shown
kindness to my master by this.
24:15 And it happened, before he was done speaking,
that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel
the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother,
with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
24:16 And the maiden
was very fair to look upon, a virgin, no man had known
her. And she went down to the fountain and filled her
pitcher and came up.
24:17 And the servant ran to meet her and said, I
beseech you, give me a little water to drink from your
pitcher.
24:18 And she said, Drink, my lord. And she hurried
and let down her pitcher upon her hand and gave him
MLVbible.com GENESIS 21
drink.
24:19 And when she had finished giving him drink,
she said, I will also draw for your camels, until they have
done drinking.
24:20 And she hurried and emptied her
pitcher into the trough and ran again to the well to draw
and drew for all his camels.
24:21 And the man looked steadfastly on her, keeping
silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey
prosperous or not.
24:22 And it happened, as the camels had finished
drinking, that the man took a golden ring of half a shekel
weight and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels
weight of gold, 24:23
and said, Whose daughter are you?
Tell me, I beseech you. Is there room in your father's
house for us to lodge in?
24:24 And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel
the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.
24:25
Moreover, she said to him, We both have enough straw
and fodder and room to lodge in.
24:26 And the man bowed his head and worshiped
Jehovah. 24:27 And he said, Praise Jehovah, the God of my
master Abraham, who has not forsaken his loving
kindness and his truth toward my master, I being in the
way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's
brothers.
24:28 And the girl ran and told her mother's house
according to these words. 24:29 And Rebekah had a brother
and his name was Laban. And Laban ran out to the man,
to the fountain. 24:30 And it happened, when he saw the
ring and the bracelets upon his sister's hands and when he
heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus, the
man spoke to me, that he came to the man. And behold, he
was standing by the camels at the fountain. 24:31 And he
said, Come in, you blessed of Jehovah. Why do you stand
outside? For I have prepared the house and room for the
camels.
24:32 And the man came into the house and he
ungirded the camels. And he gave straw and fodder for the
camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men
who were with him.
24:33 And there was food set before
him to eat. But he said, I will not eat until I have told of
my errand. And he said, Speak on.
24:34 And he said, I am Abraham's servant.
24:35 And
Jehovah has blessed my master greatly and he has become
great. And he has given him flocks and herds and silver
and gold and men-servants and maid-servants and camels
and donkeys. 24:36 And Sarah my master's wife bore a son
to my master when she was old. And to him he has he
given all that he has.
24:37 And my master made me swear, saying, You will
not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, in whose land I dwell,
24:38
but you will go to
my father's house and to my kindred and take a wife for
my son.
24:39 And Isaid to my master, Perhaps the woman will
not follow me.
24:40 And he said to me, Jehovah, before whom I walk,
will send his messenger with you and prosper your way.
And you will take a wife for my son of my kindred and of
my father's house. 24:41 Then you will be clear from my
oath, when you come to my kindred. And if they do not
give her to you, you will be clear from my oath.
24:42 And I came this day to the fountain and said, O
Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, I pray, if you
will, prosper the way on which I am now going,
24:43
behold, I am standing by the fountain of water and let it
happen, that the maiden who comes out to draw, to whom
I will say, I beseech you, give me a little water from your
pitcher to drink,
24:44
and she will say to me, Both drink
you and I will also draw for your camels, let her be the
woman whom Jehovah has appointed for my master's son.
24:45 And before I was done speaking in my heart,
behold, Rebekah came out with her pitcher on her
shoulder. And she went down to the fountain and drew.
And I said to her, Let me drink, I beseech you. 24:46 And
she made haste and let down her pitcher from her shoulder
and said, Drink and I will also give your camels drink. So
I drank and she also made the camels drink.
24:47 And I asked her and said, Whose daughter are
you? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son,
whom Milcah bore to him. And I put the ring upon her
nose and the bracelets upon her hands. 24:48 And I bowed
my head and worshiped Jehovah and blessed Jehovah, the
God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right
way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son. 24:49
And now if you* will deal kindly and truly with my master,
tell me. And if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right
hand, or to the left.
24:50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The
thing proceeds from Jehovah; we cannot speak to you bad
or good. 24:51 Behold, Rebekah is before you, take her and
go and let her be your master's son's wife, as Jehovah has
spoken.
24:52 And it happened, that, when Abraham's servant
heard their words, he bowed himself down to the earth to
Jehovah. 24:53 And the servant brought out jewels of silver
and jewels of gold and garments and gave them to
Rebekah. He also gave precious things to her brother and
to her mother.
24:54 And they ate and drank, he and the men
who were with him and stayed all night. And they rose up
in the morning and he said, Send me away to my master.
24:55 And her brother and her mother said, Let the
maiden abide with us a few days, for at the least ten. After
that she will go.
24:56 And he said to them, Do not hinder me, since
Jehovah has prospered my way. Send me away that I may
go to my master.
24:57 And they said, We will call the
maiden and inquire at her mouth. 24:58 And they called
Rebekah and said to her, Will you go with this man?
22 GENESIS MLVbible.org
And she said, I will go.
24:59 And they sent Rebekah their sister away and her
nurse and Abraham's servant and his men. 24:60 And they
blessed Rebekah and said to her, Our sister, you will be
the mother of thousands of ten thousands and let your
seed possess the gate of those who hate them.
24:61 And
Rebekah arose and her maidens and they rode upon the
camels and followed the man. And the servant took
Rebekah and went his way.
24:62 And Isaac came from the way of Beer-lahai-roi
{Well of the Living One, My Beholder}, and he dwelt in the
land of the South. 24:63 And Isaac went out to meditate in
the field at the evening. And he lifted up his eyes and saw,
and behold, there were camels coming.
24:64 And Rebekah
lifted up her eyes and when she saw Isaac, she fell from
the camel.
24:65 And she said to the servant, What man is
this who walks in the field to meet us? And the servant
said, It is my master. And she took her veil and covered
herself.
24:66 And the servant told Isaac all the things that he
had done. 24:67 And Isaac brought her into his mother
Sarah's tent and took Rebekah and she became his wife
and he loved her. And Isaac was comforted after his
mother's death.
[Genesis 25] TOC
{Gen_25:1-4, 1Ch_1:32-33 Wife Keturah}
25:1 And Abraham took another wife and her name
was Keturah. 25:2 And she bore him Zimran and Jokshan
and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah. 25:3 And
Jokshan fathered Sheba and Dedan. And the sons of
Dedan were Asshurim and Letushim and Leummim.
25:4
And the sons of Midian were: Ephah and Epher and
Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these were the sons of
Keturah.
{Gen_25:5-6, 25:12-18, 1Ch_1:28-31, 1:34}
25:5 And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac. 25:6But
to the sons of the concubines that Abraham had, Abraham
gave gifts. And he sent them away eastward from Isaac
his son, while he yet lived to the east country.
25:7 And these are the days of the years of Abraham's
life which he lived, a hundred seventy-five years. 25:8 And
Abraham gave up the spirit and died in a good old age, an
old man and full of years and was gathered to his people.
25:9 And Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the
cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of
Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre, 25:10
the field
which Abraham purchased from the sons of Heth.
Abraham and Sarah his wife was buried there.
25:11 And it happened after the death of Abraham, that
God blessed Isaac his son. And Isaac dwelt byBeer-lahairoi {Well of the Living One, my Beholder}.
{1Ch_1:28-31, Gen_25:12-17. Ishmael}
25:12 Now these are the genealogies of Ishmael,
Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's
handmaid, bore to Abraham.
25:13 And these are the names
of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their
genealogy: Nebaioth the firstborn of Ishmael and Kedar
and Adbeel and Mibsam,
25:14
and Mishma and Dumah and
Massa, 25:15 Hadad and Tema, Jetur, Naphish and
Kedemah. 25:16 These are the sons of Ishmael and these are
their names, by their villages and by their encampments,
twelve princes according to their nations.
25:17 And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, a
hundred and thirty-seven years. And he gave up the spirit
and died and was gathered to his people. 25:18 And they
dwelt from Havilah to Shur which is before Egypt, as you
go toward Assyria. He abode opposite all his brothers.
25:19And these are the genealogies ofIsaac, Abraham's
son: Abraham fathered Isaac. 25:20 And Isaac was forty
years old when he took Rebekah to be his wife, the
daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan-aram, the sister
of Laban the Syrian. 25:21 And Isaac entreated Jehovah for
his wife, because she was barren. And Jehovah was
entreated by him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
25:22 And the children struggled together within her.
And she said, If it is so, why am I this way? And she went
to inquire of Jehovah.
25:23 And Jehovah said to her, Two nations are in your
womb and two peoples will be separated from your guts.
And the one people will be stronger than the other people.
And the elder will serve the younger.
25:24 And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled,
behold, there were twins in her womb. 25:25 And the first
came out red all over like a hairy garment and they called
his name Esau. 25:26 And after that his brother came out and
his hand had hold on Esau's heel and his name was called
Jacob. And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them.
25:27 And the boys grew. And Esau was a skillful
hunter, a man of the field. And Jacob was a quiet man,
dwelling in tents. 25:28 Now Isaac loved Esau, because he
ate from his game. And Rebekah loved Jacob.
25:29 And Jacob boiled pottage. And Esau came in from
the field and he was faint.
25:30 And Esau said to Jacob, I
beseech you, feed me with that same red pottage, because
I am faint. Therefore his name was called Edom.
25:31 And Jacob said, First sell me your birthright.
25:32
And Esau said, Behold, I am about to die and what profit
will the birthright do to me? 25:33 And Jacob said, Swear to
me first. And he swore to him and he sold his birthright to
Jacob. 25:34 And Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of
lentils. And he ate and drank and rose up and went his
way. So Esau despised his birthright.
[Genesis 26] TOC
MLVbible.com GENESIS 23
26:1 And there was a famine in the land, besides the
first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac
went to Abimelech King of the Philistines, to Gerar.
26:2
And Jehovah appeared to him and said, Do not go down
into Egypt. Dwell in the land which I will tell you of.
26:3
Journey in this land and I will be with you and will bless
you. Because I will give all these lands to you and to your
seed, and I will establish the oath that Iswore to Abraham
your father.
26:4 And I will multiply your seed as the stars
of heaven and will give to your seed all these lands and in
your seed all the nations of the earth will be blessed, 26:5
because Abrahamobeyed my voice and kept my order, my
commandments, my statutes and my laws.
26:6 And Isaac dwelt in Gerar.
26:7 And the men of the
place asked him of his wife. And he said, She is my sister.
Because he feared to say, My wife. Lest, the men of the
place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to
look upon. 26:8 And it happened, when he had been there
a long time, that Abimelech King of the Philistines looked
out at a window and saw; and behold, Isaac was playing
with Rebekah his wife.
26:9 And Abimelech called Isaac and said, Behold, she
is certainly your wife and how did you say, She is my
sister? And Isaac said to him, Because I said, Lest I die
because of her.
26:10 And Abimelech said, What is this you
have done to us? One of the people might easily have lain
with your wife and you would have brought guilt upon us.
26:11 And Abimelech ordered all the people, saying, He
who touches this man or his wife will surely be put to
death.
26:12 And Isaac sowed in that land and found a
hundredfold in the same year. And Jehovah blessed him.
26:13
 And the man became great and grew more and more
until he became very great.
26:14 And he had possessions of
flocks and possessions of herds and a great household.
And the Philistines envied him.
26:15 Now all the wells which his father's servants had
dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had
stopped and filled with soil.
26:16 And Abimelech said to
Isaac, Go from us, because you are much mightier than
we. 26:17 And Isaac departed from there and encamped in
the valley of Gerar and dwelt there.
26:18 And Isaac again dug the wells of water, which
they had dug in the days of Abraham his father. For the
Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham.
And he called their names after the names by which his
father had called them.
26:19And Isaac's servants dug in the
valley and found a well of springing water there.
26:20 And the herdsmen of Gerar contended with
Isaac's herdsmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called
the name of the well Esek {Contention}, because they
contended with him.
26:21 And they dug another well and
they contended for that also. And he called the name of it
Sitnah {Opposition}.
26:22 And he moved from there and dug another well
and they did not contend for that. And he called the name
of it Rehoboth {Wide Places}. And he said, Because now
Jehovah has made room for us and we will be fruitful in
the land. 26:23
 And he went up from there to Beer-sheba.
26:24 And Jehovah appeared to him the same night and
said, I am the God of Abraham your father. Do not fear,
because I am with you and will bless you and multiply
your seed because of my servant Abraham.
26:25 And he
built an altar there and called upon the name of Jehovah
and pitched his tent there. And Isaac's servants dug a well
there.
26:26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar and
Ahuzzath his friend and Phicol the captain of his army.
26:27 And Isaac said to them, Why have you*
come to me,
seeing you*
 hate me and have sent me away from you*
?
26:28
 And they said, We saw plainly that Jehovah was
with you. And we said, Let there now be an oath between
us, even between us and you. And let us make a covenant
with you, 26:29
that you will do us no evil, as we have not
touched you and as we have done to you nothing but good
and have sent you away in peace. You now are the blessed
of Jehovah.
26:30 And he made a feast for them and they ate and
drank.
26:31 And they rose up promptly in the morning and
swore one to another. And Isaac sent them away and they
departed from him in peace.
26:32 And it happened in the same day, that Isaac's
servants came and told him concerning the well which
they had dug and said to him, We have found water.
26:33
And he called it Shibah {Swearing}. Therefore the name of
the city is Beer-sheba {Well of the Sevenfold Oath} to this
day.
26:34 And when Esau was forty years old he took a wife
Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite and Basemath the
daughter of Elon the Hittite. 26:35 And they were a
bitterness of spirit to Isaac and to Rebekah.
[Genesis 27] TOC
27:1 And it happened, that when Isaac was old and his
eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his
elder son and said to him, My son. And he said to him,
Here I am.
27:2 And he said, Behold now, I am old, I do not
know the day of my death.
27:3 Now therefore I beseech you, take your weapons,
your quiver and your bow and go out to the field and take
game for me.
27:4 And make savory food for me, what I
love and bring it to me, that I may eat, that my soul may
bless you before I die.
27:5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his
son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for game and to
bring it home.
27:6 And Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son,
saying, Behold, I heard your father speak to Esau your
24 GENESIS MLVbible.org
brother, saying,
27:7 Bring game for me and make savory
food for me, that I may eat and bless you before Jehovah
before my death.
27:8 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according
to what I command you. 27:9 Go now to the flock and fetch
me two good kids of the goats from there. And I will make
them savory food for your father, what he loves. 27:10 And
you will bring it to your father, that he may eat, so that he
may bless you before his death.
27:11 And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold,
Esau my brother is a hairy man and I am a smooth man.
27:12 My father will perhaps feel me and I will seem to him
as a deceiver. And I will bring a curse upon me and not a
blessing.
27:13 And his mother said to him, Upon me be
your curse, my son. Only obey my voice and go fetch
them for me.
27:14 And he went and fetched and brought them to his
mother. And his mother made savory food, what his father
loved.
27:15 And Rebekah took the desirable garments of
Esau her elder son, which were with her in the house and
put them upon Jacob her youngerson. 27:16 And she put the
skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands and upon the
smooth of his neck.
27:17 And she gave the savory food and
the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her
son Jacob.
27:18 And he came to his father and said, My father.
And he said, Here I am. Who are you, my son? 27:19 And
Jacob said to his father, I am Esau your firstborn. I have
done as you commanded me. I beseech you, arise, sit and
eat of my game, that your soul may bless me. 27:20 And
Isaac said to his son, How is it that you have found it so
quickly, my son? And he said, Because Jehovah your God
brought it before me.
27:21 And Isaac said to Jacob, I beseech you, come
near that I may feel you, my son, whether you are my very
son Esau or not.
27:22 And Jacob went near to Isaac his
father. And he felt him and said, The voice is Jacob's
voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. 27:23 And he
did not discern him, because his hands were hairy as his
brother Esau's hands. So he blessed him.
27:24 And he said, Are you my very son Esau? And he
said, I am.
27:25 And he said, Bring it near to me and I will
eat of my son's game, that my soul may bless you. And he
brought it near to him and he ate. And he brought wine to
him and he drank.
27:26 And his father Isaac said to him, Come near now
and kiss me, my son. 27:27 And he came near and kissed
him. And he smelled the smell of his garments and
blessed him and said, See, the smell of my son is as the
smell of a field that Jehovah has blessed. 27:28 And God
give you of the dew of heaven and of the fatness of the
earth and plenty of grain and new wine. 27:29 Let peoples
serve you and nations bow down to you. Be lord over your
brothers and let your mother's sons bow down to you.
Cursed is he who curses you and blessed is he who blesses
you.
27:30 And it happened, as soon as Isaac had made an
end of blessing Jacob and Jacob was yet scarcely gone out
from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother
came in from his hunting.
27:31 And he also made savory
food and brought it to his father. And he said to his father,
Let my father arise and eat of his son's game, that your
soul may bless me.
27:32 And Isaac his father said to him, Who are you?
And he said, I am your son, your firstborn, Esau. 27:33 And
Isaac trembled very exceedingly and said, Who then is he
who has taken game and brought it to me and I have eaten
of all before you came and have blessed him? Yes, he will
be blessed. 27:34 When Esau heard the words of his father,
he cried with an exceedingly great and bitter cry and said
to his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
27:35
And he said, Your brother came with guile and has taken
away your blessing.
27:36 And he said, Is he not rightly named Jacob? For
he has supplanted me these two times. He took away my
birthright, and behold, now he has taken away my
blessing. And he said, Have you not reserved a blessing
for me?
27:37 And Isaac answered and said to Esau, Behold, I
have made him your lord and all his brothers I have given
to him for servants and I have sustained him with grain
and new wine. And what then shall I do for you, my son?
27:38 And Esau said to his father, Have you but one
blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
27:39
 And Isaac his
father answered and said to him, Behold, of the fatness of
the earth will be your dwelling and of the dew of heaven
from above. 27:40 And you will live by your sword and you
will serve your brother. And it will happen, when you will
break loose, that you will shake his yoke from your neck.
27:41 And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing
with which his father blessed him. And Esau said in his
heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand.
Then I will kill my brother Jacob. 27:42 And the words of
Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah. And she sent and
called Jacob her younger son and said to him, Behold,
your brother Esau comforts himself concerning you, to kill
you.
27:43 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice and arise,
flee to Laban my brother to Haran. 27:44 And abide with
him a few days, until your brother's fury turns away,
27:45
until your brother's anger turns away from you and he
forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send and
fetch you from there. Why should I be bereaved of you*
both in one day?
27:46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life
because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob takes a wife of
the daughters of Heth, those like these, of the daughters of
MLVbible.com GENESIS 25
the land, what good will my life do me?
[Genesis 28] TOC
28:1 And Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and
ordered him and said to him, You will not take a wife of
the daughters of Canaan. 28:2 Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to
the house of Bethuel your mother's father and take a wife
from there of the daughters of Laban your mother's
brother.
28:3 And God Almighty bless you and make you
fruitful and multiply you, that you may be a company of
peoples, 28:4
and give you the blessing of Abraham, to you
and to your seed with you, that you may inherit the land
of your travels, which God gave to Abraham.
28:5 And Isaac sent Jacob away. And he went to
Paddan-aram to Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the
brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
28:6 Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and
sent him away to Paddan-aram, to take for him a wife
from there and that as he blessed him he gave him an
order, saying, You will not take a wife of the daughters of
Canaan,
28:7
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his
mother and had gone to Paddan-aram.
28:8 And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan did
not please Isaac his father.
28:9 And Esau went to Ishmael
and took, besides the wives that he had, Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of
Nebaioth, to be his wife.
28:10 And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba and went
toward Haran. 28:11 And he fell {came} upon a certain
place and stayed there all night, because the sun was set.
And he took one of the stones of the place and put it under
his head and lay down in that place to sleep. 28:12 And he
dreamed and behold, a ladder set up on the earth and the
top of it reached to heaven. And behold, the messengers
of God ascending and descending on it.
28:13 And behold, Jehovah stood above it and said, I
am Jehovah, the God of Abraham your father and the God
of Isaac. The land on which you lie, to you I will give it
and to your seed. 28:14 And your seed will be as the dust of
the earth and you willspread abroad to the west and to the
east and to the north and to the south. And all the families
of the earth will be blessed in you and in your seed. 28:15
And behold, I am with you and will keep you wherever
you go and will bring you again into this land. Because I
will not leave you, until I have done what I have spoken
to you.
28:16 And Jacob awoke out of his sleep and he said,
Surely Jehovah is in this place and I did not know it.
28:17
And he was afraid and said, How awesome is this place!
This is none other than the house of God and this is the
gate of heaven. 28:18 And Jacob rose up early in the
morning and took the stone that he had put under his head
and set it up for a pillar and poured oil upon the top of it.
28:19 And he called the name of that place Bethel {House of
God}, but the name of the city was Luz at first.
28:20 And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be
with me and will keep me in this way that I go and will
give me bread to eat and garments to put on, 28:21
so that I
come again to my father's house in peace and Jehovah will
be my God, 28:22 then this stone, which I have set up as a
pillar, will be God's house. And of all that you will give
me I will surely give the tenth to you.
[Genesis 29] TOC
29:1 Then Jacob went on his journey and came to the
land of the sons of the east.
29:2 And he looked, and behold,
a well in the field. And behold, three flocks of sheep were
lying there by it, because they watered the flocks out of
that well. And the stone upon the well's mouth was great.
29:3 And all the flocks were gathered there. And they rolled
the stone from the well's mouth and watered the sheep and
put the stone again upon the well's mouth in its place.
29:4 And Jacob said to them, My brothers, where are
you*
from? And they said, We are of Haran. 29:5 And he
said to them, Do you*
know Laban the son of Nahor? And
they said, We know him.
29:6 And he said to them, Is it well
with him? And they said, It is well. And behold, Rachel
his daughter comes with the sheep.
29:7 And he said, Behold, it is yet high day, it is not
time that the cattle should be gathered together. Water the
sheep and go and feed them.
29:8 And they said, We cannot
until all the flocks be gathered together and they roll the
stone from the well's mouth. Then we water the sheep. 29:9
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with
her father's sheep, because she kept them.
29:10 And it happened, when Jacob saw Rachel the
daughter of Laban his mother's brother and the sheep of
Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near and
rolled the stone from the well's mouth and watered the
flock of Laban his mother's brother.
29:11 And Jacob kissed
Rachel and lifted up his voice and wept.
29:12 And Jacob
told Rachel that he was her father's brother and that he was
Rebekah's son. And she ran and told her father.
29:13
 And it happened, when Laban heard the news of
Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him and
embraced him and kissed him and brought him to his
house. And he told Laban all these things. 29:14 And Laban
said to him, Surely you are my bone and my flesh. And he
abode with him the space of a month.
29:15 And Laban said to Jacob, Because you are my
brother, should you therefore serve me freely? Tell me,
what will your wages be? 29:16 And Laban had two
daughters. The name of the elder was Leah and the name
of the younger was Rachel.
29:17 And Leah's eyes were
weak, but Rachel was beautiful of form and appearance.
29:18 And Jacob loved Rachel and he said, I will serve you
26 GENESIS MLVbible.org
seven years for Rachel your younger daughter.
29:19 And
Laban said, It is better that I give her to you, than that I
should give her to another man. Abide with me.
29:20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel. And
they seemed to him but a few days in the love he had for
her.
29:21 And Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife, for
my days are fulfilled, that I may go in to her.
29:22 And
Laban gathered together all the men of the place and made
a feast.
29:23 And it happened in the evening, that he took
Leah his daughter and brought her to him. And he went in
to her.
29:24 And Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid to his
daughter Leah for a handmaid.
29:25 And it happened in the morning that, behold, it
was Leah. And he said to Laban, What is this you have
done to me? Did I not serve with you for Rachel? Why
then have you deceived me? 29:26 And Laban said, It is not
so done in our place, to give the younger before the
firstborn. 29:27 Fulfill the week of this one and we will also
give you the other for the service which you will serve
with me yet seven other years.
29:28 And Jacob did so and fulfilled her week. And he
gave him Rachel his daughter as a wife. 29:29 And Laban
gave to Rachel, his daughter, Bilhah his handmaid to be
her handmaid. 29:30 And he also went in to Rachel and also
he loved Rachel more than Leah and served with him yet
seven other years.
{Gen_29:31-30:24, Gen_35:16-18, 1Ch_2:1-2.}
29:31 And Jehovah saw that Leah was hated and he
opened her womb, but Rachel was barren. 29:32 And Leah
conceived and bore a son and she called his name Reuben.
Because she said, Because Jehovah has looked upon my
affliction, because now my husband will love me.
29:33 And she conceived again and bore a son and said,
Because Jehovah has heard that I am hated, he has
therefore given me this son also. And she called his name
Simeon.
29:34 And she conceived again and bore a son and said,
Now this time my husband will be joined to me, because
I have borne him three sons. Therefore his name was
called Levi.
29:35 And she conceived again and bore a son. And she
said, This time I will praise Jehovah. Therefore she called
his name Judah. And she left off bearing.
[Genesis 30] TOC
30:1 And when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no
sons, Rachel envied her sister and she said to Jacob, Give
me sons, or else I die.
30:2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel and
he said, Am I in God's place, who has withheld from you
the fruit of the womb?
30:3 And she said, Behold, my maid Bilhah, go in to
her, that she may bear upon my knees and I also may
obtain sons by her.
30:4 And she gave him Bilhah her
handmaid as a wife and Jacob went in to her.
30:5 And
Bilhah conceived and bore Jacob a son. 30:6 And Rachel
said, God has judged me and has also heard my voice and
has given me a son. Therefore she called his name Dan.
30:7 And Bilhah Rachel's handmaid conceived again
and bore Jacob a second son. 30:8 And Rachel said, With
mighty wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister and I
have indeed prevailed. And she called his name Naphtali.
30:9 When Leah saw that she had left off bearing, she
took Zilpah her handmaid and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
30:10 And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a son. 30:11
And Leah said, Good-fortune! And she called his name
Gad.
30:12 And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a second
son. 30:13 And Leah said, I am fortunate! Because the
daughters will call me fortunate. And she called his name
Asher.
30:14 And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest
and found love-apples in the field and brought them to his
mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, I beseech you,
give me from your son's love-apples.
30:15 And she said to her, Is it a small matter that you
have taken away my husband? And would you take away
my son's love-apples also?
And Rachel said, Therefore he may lie with you
tonight for your son's love-apples.
30:16 And Jacob came from the field in the evening and
Leah went out to meet him and said, You must come in to
me, because I have surely hired you with my son's loveapples. And he lay with her that night.
30:17 And God listened to Leah and she conceived and
bore Jacob a fifth son. 30:18 And Leah said, God has given
me my hire, because I gave my handmaid to my husband.
And she called his name Issachar.
30:19 And Leah conceived again and bore a sixth son to
Jacob. 30:20 And Leah said, God has endowed me with a
good endowment. Now my husband will dwell with me,
because I have borne him six sons. And she called his
name Zebulun.
30:21 And afterwards she bore a daughter and called her
name Dinah.
30:22 And God remembered Rachel. And God listened
to her and opened her womb. 30:23 And she conceived and
bore a son and said, God has taken away my reproach. 30:24
And she called his name Joseph, saying, Jehovah adds
another son to me.
30:25 And it happened, when Rachel had borne Joseph,
that Jacob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to
my own place and to my country.
30:26 Give me my wives
and my children for whom I have served you and let me
go, because you know my service with which I have
served you.
30:27 And Laban said to him, If now I have found favor
in your eyes, stay here, because I have learned by
MLVbible.com GENESIS 27
experience that Jehovah has blessed me for your sake.
30:28 And he said, Appoint for me your wages and I
will give it.
30:29 And he said to him, You yourself know how I
have served you and how your cattle have fared with me.
30:30 Because it was little which you had before I came and
it has increased to a multitude and Jehovah has blessed
you wherever I turned. And now when shall I also provide
for my own house?
30:31 And he said, What shall I give you? And Jacob
said, You will not give me anything. If you will do this
thing for me, I will again feed your flock and keep it.
30:32
I will pass through all your flock today, removing from
there every speckled and spotted one and every black one
among the sheep and the spotted and speckled among the
goats and these will be my hire.
30:33 So will my righteousness answer for me after
this, when you will come concerning my hire that is
before you. Every one that is not speckled and spotted
among the goats and black among the sheep, that is with
me, will be considered stolen.
30:34 And Laban said, Behold, O that it might be
according to your word. 30:35 And he removed that day the
male-goats that were striped and spotted and all the
female-goats that were speckled and spotted, every one
that had white in it and all the black ones among the sheep
and gave them into the hand of his sons. 30:36 And he set
three days'journey between himself and Jacob. And Jacob
fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
30:37 And Jacob took for him rods of fresh poplar and
of the almond and of the plane tree and peeled white
streaks in them and made the white which was in the rods
appear.
30:38 And he set the rods which he had peeled
before the flocks by the troughs, by the watering troughs
where the flocks came to drink. And they conceived when
they came to drink.
30:39 And the flocks conceived before the rods and the
flocks brought out striped, speckled and spotted. 30:40 And
Jacob separated the lambs and set the faces of the flocks
toward the striped and all the black in the flock of Laban.
And he put his own herds apart and did not put them near
Laban's flock.
30:41 And it happened, whenever the stronger of the
flock conceived, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes
of the flock in the troughs, that they might conceive
among the rods, 30:42
but when the flock were weak, he did
not put them in. So the weaker were Laban's and the
stronger Jacob's.
30:43 And the man increased exceedingly and had large
flocks and maid-servants and men-servants and camels
and donkeys.
[Genesis 31] TOC
31:1 And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying,
Jacob has taken away all that was our father's and he has
made all this glory of what was our father's his. 31:2 And
Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and behold, it was
not nice toward him as formerly.
31:3 And Jehovah said to Jacob, Return to the land of
your fathers and to your kindred and I will be with you.
31:4 And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the
field to his flock,
31:5
 and said to them, I see your*
father's
countenance, that it is not nice toward me as formerly, but
the God of my father has been with me. 31:6 And you*
know
that with all my power I have served your*
 father.
31:7 And your*
father has deceived me and changed my
wages ten times, but God did not allow him to hurt me. 31:8
If he said thus, The speckled will be your wages, then all
the flock bore speckled and if he said thus, The striped
will be your wages, then all the flock bore striped. 31:9 And
God has taken away the cattle of your*
father and given
them to me.
31:10 And it happened at the time that the flock
conceive, that I lifted up my eyes and saw in a dream, and
behold, the male-goats which leaped upon the flock were
striped, speckled and grayed. 31:11 And the messenger of
God said to me in the dream, Jacob.
And I said, Here I am.
31:12 And he said, Lift up now your eyes and see, all
the male-goats which leap upon the flock are striped,
speckled and grayed, because I have seen all that Laban
does to you. 31:13
I am the God of Bethel, where you
anointed a pillar, where you vowed a vow to me. Now
arise, get out from this land and return to the land of your
nativity.
31:14
 And Rachel and Leah answered and said to him,
Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's
house? 31:15 Are we not accounted by him as foreigners?
Because he has sold us and has also devoured our money.
31:16Because all the riches which God has taken away from
our father, that is ours and our children's. Now then,
whatever God has said to you, do.
31:17 Then Jacob rose up and set his sons and his wives
upon the camels. 31:18 And he carried away all his cattle
and all his substance which he had gathered, the cattle of
his spoil, which he had gathered in Paddan-aram, to go to
Isaac his father to the land of Canaan.
31:19 Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep and
Rachel stole the household-idol that was her father's. 31:20
And Jacob stole away secretly from Laban the Syrian, in
that he did not tell him that he fled. 31:21 So he fled with all
that he had. And he rose up and passed over the River and
set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
31:22 And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob
had fled. 31:23 And he took his brothers with him and
pursued after himseven days' journey and he overtook him
in the mountain of Gilead. 31:24 And God came to Laban
28 GENESIS MLVbible.org
the Syrian in a dream of the night and said to him, Take
heed to yourself that you do not speak to Jacob either
good or bad.
31:25 And Laban came up with Jacob. Now Jacob had
pitched his tent in the mountain. And Laban encamped
with his brothers in the mountain of Gilead. 31:26 And
Laban said to Jacob, What have you done, that you have
stolen away my heart and carried away my daughters as
captives of the sword? 31:27 Why did you steal away
secretly and creep away from me and did not tell me, that
I might have sent you away with gladness and with songs,
with tambourine and with harp, 31:28
and did not allow me
to kiss my sons and my daughters? Now you have done
foolishly.
31:29
It is in the power of my hand to do you*
harm, but
the God of your*
father spoke to me last night, saying,
Take heed to yourself that you not speak to Jacob either
good or bad. 31:30 And now, though you have certainly
gone, because you have been very desirous for your
father's house, yet why have you stolen my gods?
31:31 And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because
I was afraid, because I said, Lest you should take your
daughters from me by force. 31:32 With whomever you find
your gods, he will not live, before our brothers. Discern
with me what is yours and take it to you. For Jacob did
not know that Rachel had stolen them.
31:33 And Laban went into Jacob's tent and into Leah's
tent and into the tent of the two maidservants, but he did
not find them. And he went out of Leah's tent and entered
into Rachel's tent.
31:34 Now Rachel had taken the
household-idol and put them in the camel's saddle and sat
upon them. And Laban felt around all the tent, but did not
find them.
31:35 And she said to her father, Do not let my
lord be furious that I cannot rise up before you, because
the manner of women is upon me. And he searched, but
did not find the household-idol.
31:36 And Jacob was furious and contended with
Laban. And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is
my trespass? What is my sin that you have hotly-pursued
after me? 31:37 Since you have felt around all my stuff,
what have you found of all your household stuff? Set it
here before my brothers and your brothers, that they may
judge between us two.
31:38 These twenty years I have been with you, your
ewe-lambs and your female-goats have not cast their
young and I have not eaten the rams of your flocks. 31:39
I
did not bring to you what was torn by beasts; I bore the
loss of it, you required it of my hand, whether stolen by
day or stolen by night.
31:40
I was there in the day, the drought and the frost
by night consumed me and my sleep fled from my eyes.
31:41 These twenty years I have been in your house. I
served you fourteen years for your two daughters and six
years for your flock. And you have changed my wages ten
times. 31:42 Unless the God of my father, the God of
Abraham and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely
now you would have sent me away empty. God has seen
my affliction and the labor of my hands and rebuked you
last night.
31:43 And Laban answered and said to Jacob, The
daughters are my daughters and the sons are my sons and
the flocks are my flocks and all that you see is mine. And
what can I do this day to these my daughters, or to their
sons whom they have borne? 31:44 And now come, let us
make a covenant, I and you and let it be for a witness
between me and you.
31:45 And Jacob took a stone and lifted it up for a pillar.
31:46 And Jacob said to his brothers, Gather stones and they
took stones and made a heap. And they ate there by the
heap. 31:47 And Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha {Aramaic:
Heap of the Testimony}, but Jacob called it Galeed {Hebrew:
Heap of the Testimony}.
31:48 And Laban said, This heap is witness between me
and you this day. Therefore the name of it was called
Galeed, 31:49
and Mizpah. Since he said, May Jehovah
watch between me and you, when we are hidden from one
another,
31:50
if you will mistreat my daughters and if you
will take wives besides my daughters, no man is with us,
see, God is witness between me and you.
31:51 And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap and
behold the pillar, which I have set between me and you.
31:52 This heap is witness and the pillar is witness, that I
will not pass over this heap to you and that you will not
pass over this heap and this pillar for harm to me. 31:53 The
God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of their
father, judge between us. And Jacob swore by the fear of
his father Isaac.
31:54 And Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain and
called his brothers to eat bread. And they ate bread and
stayed all night on the mountain. 31:55 And early in the
morning Laban rose up and kissed his sons and his
daughters and blessed them. And Laban departed and
returned to his place.
[Genesis 32] TOC
32:1 And Jacob went on his way and the messengers of
God met him.
32:2 And Jacob said when he saw them, This
is God's camp. And he called the name of that place
Mahanaim.
32:3 And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his
brother to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
32:4 And he
commanded them, saying, You* will say to my lord Esau
thus, your servant Jacob says thus, I have traveled with
Laban and stayed until now. 32:5 And I have oxen and
donkeys, flocks and men-servants and maid-servants. And
I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in your
sight.
MLVbible.com GENESIS 29
32:6 And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We
came to your brother Esau and moreover he comes to
meet you and four hundred men with him.
32:7 Then Jacob
was greatly afraid and was distressed. And he divided the
people that were with him and the flocks and the herds
and the camels, into two companies. 32:8 And he said, If
Esau comes to the one company and slays it, then the
company which is left will escape.
32:9 And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham and
God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, who said to me,
Return to your country and to your kindred and I will do
good things with you, 32:10
I am not worthy of the least of
all the loving kindnesses and of all the truth, which you
have shown to your servant, because with my staff I
passed over this Jordan and now I have become two
companies.
32:11
I beseech you, deliver me from the hand of my
brother, from the hand of Esau. Because Ifear him, lest he
comes and slays me, the mother with the sons. 32:12 And
you said, I will surely do you good and make your seed as
the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for a
multitude.
32:13
 And he lodged there that night and took of what
he had with him a present for Esau his brother:
32:14
two
hundred female-goats and twentymale-goats,two hundred
ewe-lambs and twenty rams, 32:15
thirty milk camels and
their colts, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty femaledonkeys and ten foals.
32:16 And he delivered them into the hand of his
servants, every herd by itself and said to his servants, Pass
over before me and put a space between herd and herd.
32:17 And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau
my brother meets you and asks you, saying, Whose are
you? And where do you go? And whose are these before
you? 32:18
 Then you will say, Your servant Jacob's. It is a
present sent to my lord Esau. And behold, he also is
behind us.
32:19 And he commanded also the second and the third
and all who followed the herds, saying, On this manner
will you*
speak to Esau when you*
find him,
32:20
and you*
will say, Moreover, behold, your servant Jacob is behind
us. Because he said, I will appease him with the present
that goes before me and afterward I will see his face.
Perhaps he will accept me. 32:21 So the present passed over
before him and he himself lodged that night in the
company.
32:22 And he rose up that night and took his two wives
and his two handmaids and his eleven sons and passed
over the ford of the Jabbok.
32:23 And he took them and
sent them over the brook and sent over what he had.
32:24 And Jacob was left alone and a man wrestled
with him until the breaking of the day.
32:25 And when he
saw that he did not prevail against him, he touched the
hollow of his thigh and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was
strained as he wrestled with him.
32:26 And he said, Let me go, because the day breaks.
And he said, I will not let you go unless you bless me. 32:27
And he said to him, What is your name? And he said,
Jacob. 32:28 And he said, Your name will be called Jacob no
more, but Israel, because you have striven with God and
with men and have prevailed.
32:29 And Jacob asked him and said, I beseech you, tell
me your name.
And he said, Why is it that you ask for my name? And
he blessed him there.
32:30 And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel
{Face of God}, because, I have seen God, face to face and
my life is preserved.
32:31 And the sun rose upon him as he passed over
Peniel {Face of God} and he limped upon his thigh. 32:32
Therefore the sons of Israel do not eat the muscle of the
hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, to this day,
because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the
muscle of the hip.
[Genesis 33] TOC
33:1 And Jacob lifted up his eyes and looked, and
behold, Esau was coming and four hundred men with him.
And he divided the children to Leah and to Rachel and to
the two handmaids. 33:2 And he put the handmaids and
their children foremost and Leah and her children behind
and Rachel and Joseph behind them.
33:3 And he himself
passed over before them and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.
33:4 And Esau ran to meet him and embraced him and
fell on his neck and kissed him and they wept.
33:5 And he
lifted up his eyes and saw the women and the children and
said, Who are these with you? And he said, The children
whom God has graciously given your servant.
33:6 Then the handmaids came near, they and their
children and they bowed themselves. 33:7 And Leah also
and her children came near and bowed themselves. And
afterward Joseph came near and Rachel and they bowed
themselves.
33:8 And he said, What do you mean by all this
company which I met? And he said, To find favor in the
sight of my lord.
33:9 And Esau said, I have enough, my brother, let what
you have be yours.
33:10 And Jacob said, No, I beseech you, if now I have
found favor in your sight, then receive my present at my
hand, inasmuch as I have seen your face, as any man
would see the face of God and you were pleased with me.
33:11
I beseech you, take my gift that is brought to you,
because God has dealt graciously with me and because I
have enough. And he urged him and he took it.
33:12 And he said, Let us pull out and let us go and I
30 GENESIS MLVbible.org
will go before you. 33:13 And he said to him, My lord
knows that the children are tender and that the flocks and
herds with me have their young and if they overdrive them
one day, all the flocks will die. 33:14
 I beseech you, let my
lord pass over before his servant and I will lead on gently,
according to the pace of the cattle that are before me and
according to the pace of the children, until I come to my
lord to Seir.
33:15 And Esau said, Let me now leave with you some
of the folks that are with me. And he said, What need is
it? Let me find favor in the sight of my lord. 33:16 So Esau
returned that day on his way to Seir.
33:17
 And Jacob traveled to Succoth and built for him
a house and made booths for his cattle. Therefore the
name of the place is called Succoth. 33:18 And Jacob came
in peace to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of
Canaan, when he came from Paddan-aram and encamped
before the city.
33:19 And he bought the parcel of ground,
where he had pitched his tent, at the hand of the sons of
Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred lambs. 33:20 And
he erected an altar there and called it El-Elohe-Israel {God
of Israel is Mighty}.
[Genesis 34] TOC
34:1 And Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she bore
to Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land. 34:2
And Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of
the land, saw her. And he took her and lay with her and
humbled her.
34:3 And his soul clung to Dinah the daughter
of Jacob and he loved the maiden and spoke kindly to the
maiden. 34:4 And Shechem spoke to his father Hamor,
saying, Get me this maiden as a wife.
34:5 Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his
daughter. And his sons were with his cattle in the field
and Jacob held his peace until they came. 34:6 And Hamor
the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to speak with
him.
34:7 And the sons of Jacob came in from the field
when they heard it. And the men were grieved and they
were furious, because he had done senselessness in Israel
in lying with Jacob's daughter, which thing ought not to
be done.
34:8 And Hamor spoke with them, saying, The soul of
my son Shechem longs for your*
daughter. I beseech you*
,
give her to him as a wife. 34:9 And make marriages with us;
give your*
daughters to us and take our daughters to you*
.
34:10 And you* will dwell with us and the land will be
before you*
. Dwell and trade in it and get possessions for
you*
 in it.
34:11 And Shechem said to her father and to her
brothers, Let me find favor in your*
eyes and what you*
will say to me I will give. 34:12 Ask me ever so much
wedding-money and gift and I will give as you* willsay to
me, but give me the maiden as a wife.
34:13 And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and
Hamor his father with guile and spoke, because he had
defiled Dinah theirsister,
34:14
and said to them, We cannot
do this thing, to give our sister to a man who is
uncircumcised, because that is a reproach to us.
34:15 We will consent to you*
only on this condition, if
you* will be as we are, that every male of you*
be
circumcised. 34:16 Then we will give our daughters to you*
and we will take your*
daughters to us. And we will dwell
with you*
and we will become one people. 34:17 But if you*
will not listen to us, to be circumcised, then we will take
our daughter and we will be gone.
34:18 And their words pleased Hamor and Shechem
Hamor's son. 34:19
 And the young man did not delay to do
the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter. And
he was honored above all the house of his father.
34:20 And Hamor and Shechem his son came to the gate
of their city and spoke with the men of their city, saying,
34:21 These men are peaceable with us, therefore let them
dwell in the land and trade in it, for, behold, the land is
large enough for them. Let us take their daughters to us for
wives and let us give them our daughters.
34:22 Only on this condition will the men consent to us
to dwell with us, to become one people, if every male
among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised. 34:23
Shall not their cattle and their substance and all their
beasts be ours? Only let us consent to them and they will
dwell with us.
34:24 And all who went out of the gate of his city
listened to Hamor and to Shechem his son and every male
was circumcised, all who went out of the gate of his city.
34:25 And it happened on the third day, when they were
sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi,
Dinah's brothers, each man took his sword and came upon
the city securely and killed all the males.
34:26 And they
killed Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the
sword and took Dinah out of Shechem's house and went
forth.
34:27 The sons of Jacob came upon the slain and
plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.
34:28 They took their flocks and their herds and their
donkeys and what was in the city and what was in the
field, 34:29
and all their wealth and all their little ones and
their wives, they took captive and made a prey, even all
that was in the house.
34:30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, You*
have
troubled me, to make me stink among the inhabitants of
the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. And I
being few in number, they will gather themselves together
against me and strike me and I will be destroyed, I and my
house. 34:31 And they said, Should he deal with oursister as
with a prostitute?
[Genesis 35] TOC
MLVbible.com GENESIS 31
35:1 And God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel and
dwell there and make an altar there to God, who appeared
to you when you fled from the face of Esau your brother.
35:2 Then Jacob said to his household and to all who
were with him, Put away the foreign gods that are among
you*
and purify yourselves and change your*
garments. 35:3
And let us arise and go up to Bethel and I will make an
altar there to God, who answered me in the day of my
distress and was with me on the way which I went.
35:4
And they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in
their hand and the rings which were in their ears. And
Jacob hid them under the oak that was by Shechem.
35:5 And they traveled and a terror of God was upon
the cities that were all around them and they did not
pursue after the sons of Jacob.
35:6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of
Canaan (what is Bethel), he and all the people that were
with him.
35:7 And he built an altar there and called the
place El-bethel, because God was revealed to him there,
when he fled from the face of his brother.
35:8 And Deborah, Rebekah's nurse died and she was
buried below Bethel under the oak. And the name of it
was called Allon-bacuth {Oak of Weeping}.
35:9 And God appeared to Jacob again, when he came
from Paddan-aram and blessed him.
35:10 And God said to
him, Your name is Jacob. Your name will not be called
any more Jacob, but Israel will be your name. And he
called his name Israel.
35:11 And God said to him, I am God
Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation and a
company of nations will be of you and kings will come
out of your loins. 35:12 And the land which I gave to
Abraham and Isaac, I will give it to you and I will give the
land to your seed after you.
35:13 And God went up from him in the place where he
spoke with him.
35:14 And Jacob set up a pillar in the place
where he spoke with him, a pillar of stone. And he poured
out a drink-offering on it and poured oil on it.
35:15 And
Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with
him, Bethel.
35:16 And they traveled from Bethel. And there was
still some distance to come to Ephrath and Rachel
travailed and she had hard labor.
35:17 And it happened,
when she was in hard labor, that the midwife said to her,
Do not fear, now you will have another son. 35:18 And it
happened, as her soul was departing (for she died), that
she called his name Ben-oni {Son of Sorrow}, but his father
called him Benjamin {Son of the Right}.
35:19 And Rachel died and was buried on the way to
Ephrath (what is Bethlehem). 35:20 And Jacob set up a
pillar upon her tomb, the same is the Pillar of Rachel's
tomb to this day.
35:21 And Israel traveled and spread his tent beyond
the tower of Eder.
35:22 And it happened, while Israel dwelt
in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his
father's concubine and Israel heard of it.
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. 35:23
 The sons of
Leah were: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn and Simeon and Levi
and Judah and Issachar and Zebulun. 35:24 The sons of
Rachel were: Joseph and Benjamin. 35:25 And the sons of
Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid were: Dan and Naphtali.
35:26
And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid were: Gad and
Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him
in Paddan-aram.
35:27
 And Jacob came to Isaac his father to Mamre, to
Kiriath-arba (what is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac
traveled.
{Gen_35:28-29, 40:1-23, 41:1-57}
35:28 And the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty
years. 35:29 And Isaac gave up the spirit and died and was
gathered to his people, old and full of days. And Esau and
Jacob his sons buried him.
[Genesis 36] TOC
{Gen_36:1-19, 1Ch_1:35:27}
36:1 Now these are the genealogies of Esau (what is
Edom).
36:2 Esau took his wives from the daughters of
Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite and
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon
the Hivite, 36:3
and Basemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of
Nebaioth. 36:4 And Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau and
Basemath bore Reuel,
36:5
and Oholibamah bore Jeush and
Jalam and Korah. These are the sons of Esau, who were
born to him in the land of Canaan.
36:6 And Esau took his wives and his sons and his
daughters and all the souls of his house and his cattle and
all his beasts and all his possessions, which he had
gathered in the land of Canaan and went into a land away
from his brother Jacob. 36:7 Because their substance was
too great for them to dwell together and the land of their
travels could not bear them because of their cattle. 36:8 And
Esau dwelt in Mount Seir. Esau is Edom.
36:9 And these are the genealogies of Esau (the father
of the Edomites) in Mount Seir.
36:10
 These are the names
of Esau's sons: Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau,
Reuel the son of Basemath the wife of Esau. 36:11
 And the
sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho and Gatam and
Kenaz.
36:12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's
son and she bore to Eliphaz: Amalek. These are the sons
of Adah, Esau's wife. 36:13 And these are the sons of Reuel:
Nahath and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah, these were the
sons of Basemath, Esau's wife. 36:14 And these were the
sons of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of
Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bore to Esau Jeush and Jalam
and Korah.
36:15 These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau: The sons
of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau were: chief Teman, chief
Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
36:16
chief Korah, chief
32 GENESIS MLVbible.org
Gatam, chief Amalek. These are the chiefs that came by
Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.
36:17 And these are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son: chief
Nahath, chiefZerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These
are the chiefs that came by Reuel in the land of Edom.
These are the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife. 36:18 And
these are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau's wife: chief
Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These are the chiefs that
came by Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
36:19 These are the sons of Esau and these are their chiefs.
The same is Edom.
{Gen_36:20-30, 1Ch_1:38-42}
36:20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the
inhabitants of the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and
Anah, 36:21
and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan. These are the
chiefs that came of the Horites, the sons of Seir in the
land of Edom.
36:22 And the sons of Lotan were Hori and
Heman. And Lotan's sister was Timna. 36:23 And these are
the sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahath and Ebal,
Shepho and Onam.
36:24 And these are the sons of Zibeon:
Aiah and Anah. This is Anah who found the hot springs
in the wilderness, as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his
father.
36:25 And these are the children of Anah: Dishon
and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah. 36:26 And these are
the sons of Dishon: Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and
Cheran. 36:27 These are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan and
Zaavan and Akan. 36:28 These are the sons of Dishan: Uz
and Aran.
36:29 These are the chiefs that came from the Horites:
chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah, 36:30
chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan. These are the
chiefs that came from the Horites, according to their
chiefs in the land of Seir.
{Gen_36:31-43, 1Ch_1:43-2:2}
36:31 And these are the kings that reigned in the land of
Edom, before any king reigned over the sons of Israel.
36:32
And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom and the name
of his city was Dinhabah. 36:33 And Bela died and Jobab
the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned instead of him.
36:34
And Jobab died and Husham from the land of the
Temanites reigned instead of him.
36:35 And Husham died
and Hadad the son of Bedad, who struck Midian in the
field of Moab, reigned instead of him. And the name of
his city was Avith. 36:36 And Hadad died and Samlah from
Masrekah reigned instead of him.
36:37 And Samlah died
and Shaul of Rehoboth by the Euphrates River reigned
instead of him.
36:38 And Shaul died and Baal-hanan the
son of Achbor reigned instead of him.
36:39 And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died and Hadar reigned instead
of him. And the name of his city was Pau and his wife's
name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the
daughter of Me-zahab.
36:40
 And these are the names of the chiefs that came
of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by
their names: chief Timnah, chief Alvah, chiefJetheth, 36:41
chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon, 36:42
chief
Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
36:43
chief Magdiel,
chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom, according to
their dwellings in the land of their possession. This is
Esau, the father of the Edomites.
[Genesis 37] TOC
37:1 And Jacob dwelt in the land of his father's travels,
in the land of Canaan.
37:2 These are the genealogies of Jacob. Joseph, being
seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his
brothers. And he was a lad with the sons of Bilhah and
with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives and Joseph
brought the evil report of them to their father.
37:3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons,
because he was the son of his old age. And he made for
him a coat of many colors. 37:4 And his brothers saw that
their father loved him more than all his brothers. And they
hated him and could not speak peaceably to him.
37:5 And Joseph dreamed a dream and he told it to his
brothers and they hated him yet still more. 37:6 And he said
to them, Hear, I beseech you*
, this dream which I have
dreamed. 37:7 For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the
field, and behold, my sheaf arose and also stood upright.
And behold, your*
sheaves came all around and boweddown to my sheaf.
37:8 And his brothers said to him, Shall you indeed
reign over us? Or will you indeed have dominion over us?
And they hated him yet still more for his dreams and for
his words.
37:9 And he dreamed yet another dream and told it to
his brothers. And said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream
again. And behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars
were bowing-down to me.
37:10 And he told it to his father and to his brothers.
And his father rebuked him and said to him, What is this
dream that you have dreamed? Shall I and your mother
and your brothers indeed come to bow-down ourselves to
the earth to you? 37:11 And his brothers envied him, but his
father kept the saying in mind.
37:12 And his brothers went to feed their father's flock
in Shechem.
37:13 And Israel said to Joseph, Are your
brothers not feeding the flock in Shechem? Come and I
will send you to them.
And he said to him, Here I am.
37:14 And he said to him, Go now, see whether it is
well with your brothers and well with the flock and bring
me word again. So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron
and he came to Shechem.
37:15 And a certain man found him, and behold, he was
wandering in the field. And the man asked him, saying,
What do you seek?
37:16 And he said, I am seeking my brothers. I beseech
MLVbible.com GENESIS 33
you, tell me where they are feeding.
37:17 And the man said, They have departed from here,
because I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And
Joseph went after his brothers and found them in Dothan.
37:18 And they saw him afar off. And before he came
near to them, they conspired against him to kill him.
37:19
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer comes.
37:20
 Come now therefore and let us kill him and cast him
into one of the pits. And we will say, An evil beast has
devoured him. And we will see what will become of his
dreams.
37:21 And Reuben heard it and delivered him out of
their hand and said, Let us not take his life. 37:22 And
Reuben said to them, Shed no blood. Cast him into this pit
that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand upon him, that he
might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him to his
father.
37:23 And it happened, when Joseph came to his
brothers, that they stripped Joseph of his coat, the coat of
many colors that was on him,
37:24
 and they took him and
cast him into the pit. And the pit was empty; there was no
water in it.
37:25 And they sat down to eat bread. And they lifted
up their eyes and looked, and behold, a caravan of
Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead, with their camels
bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it
down to Egypt.
37:26 And Judah said to his brothers, What profit is it
if we kill our brother and conceal his blood? 37:27 Come
and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites and do not let our
hand be upon him, because he is our brother, our flesh.
And his brothers listened to him.
37:28 And Midianites, merchants passed by there and
they drew and lifted Joseph up out of the pit and sold
Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And
they brought Joseph into Egypt.
37:29 And Reuben returned to the pit, and behold,
Joseph was not in the pit. And he tore his clothes, 37:30
and
he returned to his brothers and said, The child is not there,
and I, where shall I go?
37:31 And they took Joseph's coat and killed a malegoat and dipped the coat in the blood. 37:32
 And they sent
the coat of many colors and they brought it to their father
and said, We have found this. Please recognize it, whether
it is your son's coat or not.
37:33 And he recognized it and said, It is my son's coat.
An evil beast has devoured him; Joseph is without doubt
torn in pieces. 37:34 And Jacob tore his garments and put
sackcloth upon his loins and mourned for his son many
days. 37:35 And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to
comfort him, but he refused to be comforted and he said,
Because I will go down to Sheol to my son mourning.
And his father wept for him.
37:36 And the Midianites sold him into Egypt to
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.
[Genesis 38] TOC
{Gen_38:1-30, 1Ch_2:3-6, 8}
{Rth_4:18-22, Mat_1:3-6, Luk_3:31-33, 1Ch_2:5-14.}
38:1 And it happened at that time, that Judah went
down away from his brothers and stretched forth to a
certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah. 38:2 And Judah
saw a daughter of a certain Canaanite there whose name
was Shua. And he took her and went in to her.
38:3 And she
conceived and bore a son and he called his name Er.
38:4
And she conceived again and bore a son and she called his
name Onan. 38:5 And she yet again bore a son and called
his name Shelah. And he was at Chezib, when she bore
him.
38:6 And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn and her
name was Tamar.
38:7 And Er, Judah's firstborn, was
wicked in the sight of Jehovah and Jehovah killed him.
38:8
And Judah said to Onan, Go in to your brother's wife and
perform the duty of a husband's brother to her and raise up
seed to your brother.
38:9 And Onan knew that the seed would not be his.
And it happened, when he went in to his brother's wife,
that he spilled it on the ground, lest he should give seed to
his brother.
38:10 And the thing which he did was evil in the
sight of Jehovah and he also killed him.
38:11 Then Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in law,
Remain a widow in your father's house, till Shelah my son
is grown up, because he said, Lest he also die, like his
brothers. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
38:12 And Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah, died in
process of time. And Judah was comforted and went up to
his sheep shearers to Timnah, he and his friend Hirah the
Adullamite.
38:13 And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold, your
father-in-law goes up to Timnah to shear his sheep.
38:14
And she put the garments of her widowhood off from her
and covered herself with her veil and wrapped herself and
sat in the gateway of two-springs Enaim, which is by the
way to Timnah, because he saw that Shelah was grown up
and she was not given to him as a wife.
38:15 When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a
prostitute, because she had covered her face. 38:16 And he
turned to her by the way and said, I beseech you, come let
me come in to you, because he did not know that she was
his daughter-in-law.
And she said, What will you give me, that you may
come in to me?
38:17 And he said, I will send you a kid of the goats
from the flock.
And she said, Will you give me a pledge, till you send
it?
38:18
 And he said, What pledge shall I give you?
And she said, Your signet and your cord and your
34 GENESIS MLVbible.org
staff that is in your hand. And he gave them to her and
came in to her and she conceived by him.
38:19 And she
arose and went away and put off her veil from her and put
on the garments of her widowhood.
38:20 And Judah sent the kid of the goats by the hand
of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from
the woman's hand, but he did not find her.
38:21 Then he
asked the men of her place, saying, Where is the
prostitute, who was at two-springs Enaim by the wayside?
And they said, There has been no prostitute here.
38:22 And he returned to Judah and said, I have not
found her and also the men of the place said, There has
been no prostitute here.
38:23 And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we are
put to shame. Behold, I sent this kid and you have not
found her.
38:24 And it happened about three months after, that it
was told to Judah, saying, Tamar your daughter-in-law has
played the prostitute and moreover, behold, she is with
child by prostitution.
And Judah said, Bring her forth and let her be burnt.
38:25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her
father-in-law, saying, By the man, whose these are, I am
with child. And she said, I beseech you, discern whose
these are, the signet and the cords and the staff.
38:26
 And
Judah acknowledged themand said, She is more righteous
than I, inasmuch as I did not give her to Shelah my son.
And he knew her again no more.
38:27 And it happened in the time of her travail, that,
behold, twins were in her womb. 38:28 And it happened,
when she travailed, that one put out a hand. And the
midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread,
saying, This came out first.
38:29 And it happened, as he drew back his hand, that,
behold, his brother came out. And she said, Why have you
made a breach for yourself? Therefore his name was
called Perez.
38:30 And afterward his brother came out,
who had the scarlet thread upon his hand. And his name
was called Zerah.
[Genesis 39] TOC
39:1 And Joseph was brought down to Egypt. And
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard,
an Egyptian, bought himfromthe hand of the Ishmaelites,
who had brought him down there. 39:2 And Jehovah was
with Joseph. And he was a man who succeeds. And he
was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
39:3 And his master saw that Jehovah was with him
and that Jehovah made all that he did to prosper in his
hand. 39:4 And Joseph found favor in his sight and he
ministered to him. And he made him overseer over his
house and all that he had, he put into his hand.
39:5
 And it happened from the time that he made him
overseer in his house and over all that he had, thatJehovah
blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake. And the
blessing of Jehovah was upon all that he had, in the house
and in the field. 39:6
 And he left all that he had in Joseph's
hand and he did not know anything that he had, except the
bread which he ate. And Joseph was handsome and finelooking.
39:7 And it happened, after these things, that his
master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph and she said, Lie
with me. 39:8
 But he refused and said to his master's wife,
Behold, my master does not know what is in the house
with me and he has put all that he has into my hand. 39:9 He
is not greater in this house than I, nor has he kept back
anything from me but you, because you are his wife. How
then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
39:10 And it happened, as she spoke to Joseph day by
day, that he did not listen to her, to lie by her, or to be
with her.
39:11 And it happened, about this time, that he went
into the house to do his work and there was none of the
men of the house inside there. 39:12 And she caught him by
his garment, saying, Lie with me. And he left his garment
in her hand and fled and got out.
39:13 And it happened, when she saw that he had left
his garment in her hand and had fled forth, 39:14
that she
called to the men of her house and spoke to them, saying,
See, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to mock us. He
came in to me to lie with me and I cried with a loud voice.
39:15 And it happened, when he heard that I lifted up my
voice and cried, that he left his garment by me and fled
and got out.
39:16 And she laid up his garment by her until his
master came home. 39:17 And she spoke to him according to
these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, whom you have
brought to us, came in to me to mock me. 39:18 And it
happened, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his
garment by me and fled out.
39:19 And it happened, when his master heard the
words of his wife, which she spoke to him, saying, After
this manner, your servant did this to me, so that his wrath
was kindled. 39:20 And Joseph's master took him and put
him into the prison, the place where the king's prisoners
were bound. And he was there in the prison.
39:21 But Jehovah was with Joseph and showed
kindness to him and gave him favor in the sight of the
keeper of the prison. 39:22 And the keeper of the prison
committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners who were in
the prison. And whatever they did there, he was the doer
of it. 39:23 The keeper of the prison did not look to anything
that was under his hand, because Jehovah was with him
and what he did, Jehovah made it prosper.
[Genesis 40] TOC
MLVbible.com GENESIS 35
{Gen_35:28-29, 40:1-23, 41:1-57}
40:1 And it happened after these things, that the
cupbearer of the King of Egypt and his baker, offended
their lord the King of Egypt.
40:2 And Pharaoh was angry
against his two officers, against the chief of the
cupbearers and against the chief of the bakers. 40:3 And he
put them in confinement in the house of the captain of the
guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
40:4 And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them
and he ministered to them. And they continued a season
in confinement.
40:5 And they dreamed a dream both of them in one
night, each man his dream, each man according to the
interpretation of his dream, the cupbearer and the baker of
the King of Egypt, who were bound in the prison.
40:6 And Joseph came in to them in the morning and
saw them, and behold, they were sad. 40:7 And he asked
Pharaoh's officers who were with him in confinement in
his master's house, saying, Why do you*
look so sad
today?
40:8 And they said to him, We have dreamed a dream
and there is no man who can interpret it.
And Joseph said to them, Do not interpretations
belong to God? Tell it to me, I beseech you*
.
40:9 And the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph
and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before
me. 40:10 And three tendrils were in the vine. And it was as
though it budded, and its blossoms shot forth, and the
clusters of it brought out ripe grapes. 40:11 And Pharaoh's
cup was in my hand and I took the grapes and pressed
them into Pharaoh's cup and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's
hand.
40:12 And Joseph said to him, This is the interpretation
of it: the three tendrils are three days; 40:13 within yet three
days Pharaoh will lift up your head and restore you to
your office. And you will give Pharaoh's cup into his
hand, after the former manner when you was his
cupbearer.
40:14But have me in your remembrance when it will be
well with you and I beseech you, show kindness to me and
make mention of me to Pharaoh and bring me out of this
house.
40:15 Because indeed I was stolen away out of the
land of the Hebrews and here also I have done nothing
that they should put me into the pit.
40:16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation
was good, he said to Joseph, I also was in my dream, and
behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head. 40:17
And there was of all manner of baked food for Pharaoh in
the uppermost basket and the birds ate them out of the
basket upon my head.
40:18 And Joseph answered and said, This is the
interpretation of it: the three baskets are three days; 40:19
within yet three days Pharaoh will lift up your head from
you and will hang you on a tree and the birds will eat your
flesh from you.
40:20 And it happened the third day, which was
Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast to all his servants.
And he lifted up the head of the chief cupbearer and the
head of the chief baker among his servants. 40:21 And he
restored the chief of the cup-bearers to his office of cupbearer again and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand, 40:22
but he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to
them.
40:23 Yet the chief cupbearer did not remember
Joseph, but forgot him.
[Genesis 41] TOC
41:1
 And it happened at the end of two full years, that
Pharaoh dreamed. And behold, he stood by the river.
41:2
And behold, there came up out of the river seven cows,
fine-looking and fattened and they fed in the reed grass.
41:3 And behold, seven other cows came up after them out
of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed and stood by the
other cows upon the brink of the river.
41:4 And the illfavored and lean-fleshed cows ate up the seven finelooking and fat cows. So Pharaoh awoke.
41:5 And he slept and dreamed a second time. And
behold, seven ears of grain came up upon one stalk, fat
and good. 41:6 And behold, seven ears, thin and blasted
with the east wind, sprung up after them.
41:7 And the thin
ears swallowed up the seven fat and full ears. And
Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
41:8 And it happened in the morning, that his spirit was
troubled and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Egypt and all the wise men of it. And Pharaoh told them
his dream, but there was no man who could interpret them
to Pharaoh.
41:9Then the chief cupbearerspoke to Pharaoh, saying,
I do remember my faults this day.
41:10 Pharaoh was angry
with his servants and put me in confinement in the house
of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker.
41:11
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he, we
dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his
dream.
41:12 And there was a young man with us there, a
Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard and we told
him. And he interpreted to us our dreams. He interpreted
to each man according to his dream.
41:13 And it happened,
as he interpreted to us, so it was; he restored me to my
office and he hanged him.
41:14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph. And they
brought him hastily out of the pit and he shaved himself
and changed his garments and came in to Pharaoh. 41:15
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have dreamed a dream and
there is no man who can interpret it. And I have heard say
of you, that when you hear a dream you can interpret it.
41:16 And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me.
God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
41:17 And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, In my dream,
36 GENESIS MLVbible.org
behold, I stood upon the brink of the river.
41:18 And
behold, there came up out of the river seven cows, fatfleshed and fine-looking and they fed in the reed grass.
41:19 And behold, seven other cows came up after them,
poorly and very ill-formed and lean-fleshed, such as I
never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness. 41:20 And
the lean and ill-favored cows ate up the first seven fat
cows. 41:21 And when they had eaten them up, it could not
be known that they had eaten them, but they were still illfavored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
41:22 And I saw in my dream, and behold, seven ears
came up upon one stalk, full and good. 41:23 And behold,
seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind,
sprung up after them,
41:24
and the thin ears swallowed up
the seven good ears. And I told it to the magicians, but
there was no man who could declare it to me.
41:25 And Joseph said to Pharaoh, The dream of
Pharaoh is one; what God is about to do he has declared
to Pharaoh. 41:26 The seven good cows are seven years and
the seven good ears are seven years; the dream is one. 41:27
And the seven lean and ill-favored cows that came up
after them are seven years and also the seven empty ears
blasted with the east wind, they will be seven years of
famine.
41:28 That is the thing which Ispoke to Pharaoh. What
God is about to do he has shown to Pharaoh. 41:29 Behold,
seven years of great plenty are coming throughout all the
land of Egypt,
41:30
and seven years of famine will arise
after them. And all the plenty will be forgotten in the land
of Egypt and the famine will consume the land. 41:31
 And
the plenty will not be known in the land because of that
famine which follows, because it will be very grievous.
41:32 And because the dream was doubled to Pharaoh,
it is because the thing is established by God and God will
shortly make it happen.
41:33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look out for a man
discreet and wise and set him over the land of Egypt.
41:34
Let Pharaoh do this and let him appoint overseers over the
land and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the
seven plentiful years. 41:35 And let them gather all the food
of these good years that come and lay up grain under the
hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities and let them keep it.
41:36 And the food will be for a store to the land against the
seven years of famine, which will be in the land of Egypt,
that the land does not perish through the famine.
41:37 And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh
and in the eyes of all his servants. 41:38 And Pharaoh said
to his servants, Can we find such a one as this, a man in
whom is the spirit of God? 41:39 And Pharaoh said to
Joseph, Inasmuch as God has shown you all of this, there
is none so discreet and wise as you. 41:40 You will be over
my house and according to your word all my people will
be ruled. Only in the throne I will be greater than you. 41:41
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have set you over all
the land of Egypt.
41:42 And Pharaoh took his signet ring from his hand
and put it upon Joseph's hand and arrayed him in garments
of fine linen and put a gold chain about his neck.
41:43 And
he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had
and they cried before him, Bow the knee. And he set him
over all the land of Egypt.
41:44 And Pharaoh said to
Joseph, I am Pharaoh and without you no man will lift up
his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt.
41:45 And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenathpaneah {Egyptian: Savior of the Age; Hebrew: Revealer of
Secrets} and he gave him Asenath, the daughter of
Potipherah priest of On, for a wife. And Joseph went out
over the land of Egypt.
41:46 And Joseph was thirty years
old when he stood before Pharaoh King of Egypt. And
Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh and went
throughout all the land of Egypt.
41:47 And the earth brought out by handfuls in the
seven plentiful years. 41:48 And he gathered up all the food
of the seven years which were in the land of Egypt and
laid up the food in the cities. The food of the field, which
was all around every city, he laid up in the same. 41:49 And
Joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he left off numbering, because it was without
number.
41:50 And two sons were born to Joseph before the year
of famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of
Potipherah priest of On, bore to him.
41:51 And Joseph
called the name of the firstborn Manasseh, because God
has made me forget all my toil and all my father's house.
41:52 And the name of the second he called Ephraim,
because God has made me fruitful in the land of my
affliction.
41:53 And the seven years of plenty, that was in the land
of Egypt, came to an end. 41:54 And the seven years of
famine began to come, just-as Joseph had said. And there
was famine in all lands, but there was bread in all the land
of Egypt.
41:55 And when all the land of Egypt was
famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread. And
Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, Go to Joseph; what he
says to you*
, do.
41:56 And the famine was over all the face of the earth.
And Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold to the
Egyptians. And the famine was severe in the land of
Egypt.
41:57 And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph to
buy grain, because the famine was severe on all the earth.
[Genesis 42] TOC
42:1 Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt. And
Jacob said to his sons, Why do you*
look one upon
another? 42:2 And he said, Behold, I have heard that there
is grain in Egypt. You*
get down there and buy for us from
there, that we may live and not die.
MLVbible.com GENESIS 37
42:3 And Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain
from Egypt.
42:4 But Benjamin {Son of the Right}, Joseph's
brother, Jacob did not send with his brothers, because he
said, Lest perhaps harm befall him.
42:5 And the sons of Israel came to buy among those
who came, because the famine was in the land of Canaan.
42:6 And Joseph was the governor over the land. It was he
who sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's
brothers came and bowed themselves to him with their
faces to the earth.
42:7 And Joseph saw his brothers and he knew them,
but made himself foreign to them and spoke roughly with
them. And he said to them. From where do you*
 come?
And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
42:8 And Joseph knew his brothers, but they did not know
him.
42:9 And Joseph remembered the dreams which he
dreamed of them. And said to them, You*
are spies; you*
have come to see the nakedness of the land.
42:10 And they said to him, No, my lord, but your
servants have come to buy food. 42:11 We are all one man's
sons. We are true men. Your servants are no spies.
42:12
 And he said to them, No, but you*
 have come to
see the nakedness of the land.
42:13 And they said, We your servants are twelve
brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. And
behold, the youngest is this day with our father and one is
not {i.e. dead}.
42:14 And Joseph said to them, This is what I spoke to
you*
, saying, You*
are spies. 42:15 By this you* will be
proved; by the life of Pharaoh you* will not go forth from
here unless your*
youngest brother comes here. 42:16 Send
one of you*
and let him fetch your*
brother. And you* will
be bound, that your* words may be proved, whether there
is truth in you*
, or else by the life of Pharaoh surely you*
are spies. 42:17 And he put them all together into
confinement three days.
42:18 And Joseph said to them the third day, Do this
and live, because I fear God. 42:19
If you*
are true men, let
one of your*
brothers be bound in your*
prison house, but
go, carry grain for the famine of your*
houses, 42:20
and
bring your*
youngest brother to me. So will your* words
be verified and you*
 will not die. And they did so.
42:21 And they said one to another, We are truly guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the distress of his
soul when he besought us and we would not hear.
Therefore this distress has come upon us.
42:22 And Reuben answered them, saying, Did I not
speak to you*
, saying, Do not sin against the child and
you* would not hear? Therefore also, behold, his blood is
required.
42:23 And they did not know that Joseph understood
them, because there was an interpreter between them.
42:24
And he turned himself around from them and wept. And
he returned to them and spoke to them and took Simeon
from among them and bound him before their eyes.
42:25 Then Joseph commanded to fill their vessels with
grain and to restore every man's money into his sack and
to give them provisions for the way. And it was done thus
to them.
42:26 And they loaded their donkeys with their
grain and departed from there.
42:27 And as one of them opened his sack to give his
donkey fodder in the lodging place, he saw his money, and
behold, it was in the mouth of his sack.
42:28 And he said to
his brothers, My money is restored, and behold, it is even
in my sack. And their heart failed them and they turned
trembling one to another, saying, What is this that God has
done to us?
42:29 And they came to Jacob their father to the land of
Canaan and told him all that had befallen them, saying,
42:30 The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us
and took us for spies of the country.
42:31 And we said to
him, We are true men and we are no spies. 42:32 We are
twelve brothers, sons of our father. One is not and the
youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
42:33 And the man, the lord of the land, said to us, By
this I will know that you*
are true men. Leave one of your*
brothers with me and take grain for the famine of your*
houses and go your* way,
42:34
and bring your*
youngest
brother to me. Then I will know that you*
are no spies, but
that you*
are true men. So I will deliver your*
brother to
you*
 and you*
 will trade in the land.
42:35 And it happened as they emptied theirsacks, that,
behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack. And
when they and their father saw their bundles of money,
they were afraid.
42:36 And Jacob their father said to them, You*
have
bereaved me of my sons. Joseph is not and Simeon is not
and you* will take Benjamin {Son of the Right} away. All
these things are against me.
42:37
 And Reuben spoke to his father, saying, Kill my
two sons if I do not bring him to you. Deliver him into my
hand and I will bring him to you again.
42:38 And he said,
My son will not go down with you*
, because his brother is
dead and he only is left. If harm befalls him by the way in
which you*
go, then you* will bring down my gray hairs
with sorrow to Sheol.
[Genesis 43] TOC
43:1
 And the famine was severe in the land. 43:2 And it
happened, when they had eaten up the grain which they
had brought out of Egypt, their father said to them, Go
again, buy us a little food.
43:3 And Judah spoke to him, saying, The man testified
to us, saying, You* will not see my face unless your*
brother is with you*
.
43:4
 If you will send our brother with
38 GENESIS MLVbible.org
us, we will go down and buy food for you, 43:5
but if you
will not send him, we will not go down. Because the man
said to us, You* will not see my face unless your*
brother
be with you*
.
43:6 And Israel said, Why did you*
deal so ill with me,
as to tell the man whether you*
had yet a brother? 43:7 And
they said, The man asked diligently concerning ourselves
and concerning our kindred, saying, Is your*
father yet
alive? Have you*
another brother? And we told him those
words. Could we know in any way that he would say,
Bring your*
 brother down?
43:8 And Judah said to Israel his father, Send the
young man with me and we will arise and go, that we may
live and not die, both we and you and also our little ones.
43:9
I will be a surety for him, of my hand will you require
him. If I do not bring him to you and set him before you,
then let me bear the blame forever.
43:10Because unless we
had lingered, surely we would have now returned a
second time.
43:11 And their father Israel said to them, If it is so
now, do this: take of the choice fruits of the land in your*
vessels and carry a present down to the man, a little balm
and a little honey, spicery and myrrh, nuts and almonds.
43:12 And take double money in your*
hand and the money
that was returned in the mouth of your*
sacks carry again
in your*
hand. Perhaps it was an oversight.
43:13 Also take
your*
 brother and arise, go again to the man.
43:14 And God Almighty give you* mercy before the
man, that he may release to you*
your*
other brother and
Benjamin {Son of the Right}. And if I be bereaved of my
sons, I am bereaved.
43:15 And the men took that present and they took
double money in their hand and Benjamin {Son of the
Right} and rose up and went down to Egypt and stood
before Joseph.
43:16 And when Joseph saw Benjamin {Son of the
Right} with them, he said to the steward of his house,
Bring the men into the house and kill and make ready,
because the men will dine with me at noon. 43:17 And the
man did as Joseph commanded and the man brought the
men to Joseph's house.
43:18 And the men were afraid, because they were
brought to Joseph's house and they said, We are brought
in because of the money that was returned in our sacks at
the first time, that he may seek occasion against us and
fall upon us and take us for bondservants and our
donkeys.
43:19 And they came near to the steward of Joseph's
house and they spoke to him at the door of the house, 43:20
and said, Oh, my lord, we indeed came down at the first
time to buy food. 43:21 And it happened, when we came to
the lodging place, that we opened our sacks, and behold,
every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our
money in full weight. And we have brought it again in our
hand. 43:22 And we have brought other money down in our
hand to buy food. We do not know who put our money in
our sacks.
43:23 And he said, Peace to you*
, do not fear. Your*
God and the God of your*
father, has given you*
treasure
in your*
 sacks. I had your*
 money.
And he brought Simeon out to them.
43:24 And the man
brought the men into Joseph's house and gave them water
and they washed their feet. And he gave their donkeys
fodder.
43:25 And they made ready the present against
Joseph's coming at noon, because they heard that they
should eat bread there.
43:26 And when Joseph came home, they brought him
the present which was in their hand into the house and
bowed themselves to him to the earth. 43:27 And he asked
them of their welfare and said, Is your*
father well, the old
man of whom you*
spoke? Is he yet alive? 43:28 And they
said, Your servant our father is well; he is yet alive. And
they bowed the head and then bowed-down to him.
43:29 And he lifted up his eyes and saw Benjamin {Son
of the Right} his brother, his mother's son and said, Is this
your*
youngest brother, of whom you*
spoke to me? And
he said, God be gracious to you, my son. 43:30
 And Joseph
made haste, because his heart yearned over his brother and
he sought where to weep. And he entered into his chamber
and wept there. 43:31 And he washed his face and came out.
And he restrained himself and said, Set on bread.
43:32 And they set on for him by himself and for them
by themselves and for the Egyptians, who ate with him, by
themselves, because the Egyptians might not eat bread
with the Hebrews, because that is an abomination to the
Egyptians.
43:33
 And they sat before him, the firstborn according
to his birthright and the youngest according to his youth.
And the men marveled with one another.
43:34 And he took
and sent portions to them from before him, but Benjamin's
{Son of the Right's} portion was five times so much as any
of theirs. And they drank and were drunken with him.
[Genesis 44] TOC
44:1 And he commanded the steward of his house,
saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can
carry and put every man's money in his sack's mouth. 44:2
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the
youngest and his grain money. And he did according to the
word that Joseph had spoken.
44:3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were
sent away, they and their donkeys. 44:4 And when they had
gone out of the city and were not yet far off, Joseph said
to his steward, Get up, follow after the men and when you
overtake them, say to them, Why have you*
repaid evil for
good? 44:5
Is this not that in which my lord drinks and how
he indeed is a diviner? You*
have done evil in so doing.
44:6
MLVbible.com GENESIS 39
And he overtook them and he spoke to them these words.
44:7 And they said to him, Why does my lord speak
such words as these? Far be it from your servants that
they should do such a thing.
44:8Behold, the money, which
we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again to you
out of the land of Canaan. How then would we steal out
of your lord's house silver or gold? 44:9 With whomever of
your servants it is found, let him die and we also will be
my lord's bondservants. 44:10 And he said, Now also let it
be according to your* words. He with whom it is found
will be my bondservant and you*
 will be blameless.
44:11
 Then they hurried and took down every man his
sack to the ground and opened every man his sack.
44:12
And he searched, and began at the eldest and left off at
the youngest. And the cup was found in Benjamin's {Son
of the Right's} sack.
44:13 Then they tore their clothes and
every man loaded his donkey and returned to the city.
44:14 And Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's
house. And he was yet there and they fell before him on
the ground. 44:15 And Joseph said to them, What deed is
this that you*
have done? Do you*
not know that such a
man as I can indeed divine?
44:16 And Judah said, What will we say to my lord?
What will we speak, or how will we clear ourselves? God
has found out the iniquity of your servants. Behold, we
are my lord's bondservants, both we and he also in whose
hand the cup is found.
44:17 And he said, Far be it from me that I should do
so. The man in whose hand the cup is found, he will be
my bondservant, but as for you*
, you*
get up in peace to
your*
 father.
44:18 Then Judah came near to him and said, Oh, my
lord, I beseech you, let your servant speak a word in my
lord's ears and do not let your anger burn against your
servant, because you are even as Pharaoh.
44:19
 My lord asked his servants, saying, Have you*
 a
father, or a brother? 44:20 And we said to my lord, We have
a father, an old man and a child of his old age, a little one.
And his brother is dead and he alone is left of his mother
and his father loves him.
44:21 And you said to your servants, Bring him down
to me, that I may set my eyes upon him.
44:22 And we said
to my lord, The young man cannot leave his father, if he
should leave his father, his father would die. 44:23 And you
said to yourservants, Unless your*
youngest brother come
down with you*
, you*
 will see my face no more.
44:24 And it happened when we came up to your
servant my father, we told him the words of my lord. 44:25
And our father said, Go again, buy us a little food. 44:26
And we said, We cannot go down. If our youngest brother
is with us, then we will go down, because we may not see
the man's face unless our youngest brother be with us.
44:27 And yourservant my fathersaid to us, You*
know
that my wife bore me two sons. 44:28 And the one went out
from me and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces and I have
not seen him since. 44:29 And if you*
take this one also from
me and harm befall him, you* will bring down my gray
hairs with sorrow to Sheol.
44:30 Now therefore when I come to your servant my
father and the young man is not with us, since his life is
bound up in the young man's life, 44:31
it will happen, when
he sees that the young man is not with us, that he will die.
And your servants will bring down the gray hairs of your
servant our father with sorrow to Sheol.
44:32 Because your
servant became a surety for the young man to my father,
saying, If I do not bring him to you, then I will bear the
blame to my father forever.
44:33 Now therefore, I beseech you, let your servant
abide a bondservant to my lord instead of the young man
and let the young man go up with his brothers. 44:34
Because how shall I go up to my father, if the young man
is not with me? Lest I see the evil that will come on my
father.
[Genesis 45] TOC
45:1
 Then Joseph could not restrain himself before all
those who stood before him and he cried out, Cause every
man to go out from me. And no man stood with him while
Joseph made himself known to his brothers. 45:2 And he
wept aloud and the Egyptians heard and the house of
Pharaoh heard.
45:3 And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph, does
my father yet live? And his brothers could not answer him,
because they were troubled at his presence. 45:4 And
Joseph said to his brothers, Come near to me, I beseech
you*
. And they came near and he said, I am Joseph your*
brother, whom you*
 sold into Egypt.
45:5 And now do not be grieved, nor angry with
yourselves, that you*
sold me here, because God sent me
before you*
to preserve life. 45:6 Because the famine has
been in the land these two years and there are yet five
years, in which there will be neither plowing nor harvest.
45:7 And God sent me before you*
to preserve for you*
a
remnant on the earth and to save you*
alive by a great
deliverance.
45:8 So now it was not you*
that sent me here, but God
and he has made me a father to Pharaoh and lord of all his
house and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
45:9 You*
hasten and go up to my father and say to him,
Your son Joseph says thus: God has made me lord of all
Egypt. Come down to me, do not delay.
45:10 And you will
dwell in the land of Goshen and you will be near to me,
you and your sons and your sons'sons and your flocks and
your herds and all that you have. 45:11 And I will nourish
you there, because there are yet five years of famine, lest
you come to poverty, you and your household and all that
you have.
40 GENESIS MLVbible.org
45:12 And behold, your*
eyes see and the eyes of my
brother Benjamin {Son of the Right}, that it is my mouth
that speaks to you*
.
45:13 And you* will tell my father of all
my glory in Egypt and of all that you*
have seen. And
you*
 will hasten and bring down my father here.
45:14
 And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's {Son of
the Right's} neck and wept and Benjamin {Son of the Right}
wept upon his neck.
45:15 And he kissed all his brothers and
wept upon them. And after that his brothers talked with
him.
45:16 And the report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house,
saying, Joseph's brothers have come. And it pleased
Pharaoh well and his servants.
45:17 And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Say to your brothers,
Do this: load your*
 beasts and go, you*
get to the land of
Canaan, 45:18
and take your*
father and your*
households
and come to me. And I will give you*
the good of the land
of Egypt and you*
 will eat the fat of the land.
45:19 Now you are commanded, this do you*
: Take
wagons for you*
out of the land of Egypt for your*
little
ones and for your* wives and bring your*
father and come.
45:20 Also do not regard your*
stuff, because the good of all
the land of Egypt is yours
*
.
45:21 And the sons of Israel did so. And Joseph gave
them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh
and gave them provision for the way.
45:22 He gave to all
of them, each man, changes of garments, but to Benjamin
{Son of the Right} he gave three hundred pieces of silver
and five changes of garments.
45:23 And he sent to his father according to this
manner: ten donkeys laden with the good things of Egypt
and ten female-donkeys laden with grain and bread and
provision for his father by the way.
45:24 So he sent his
brothers away and they departed. And he said to them,
See that you*
 do not tremble {i.e. quarrel} by the way.
45:25 And they went up out of Egypt and came into the
land of Canaan to Jacob their father.
45:26 And they told
him, saying, Joseph is yet alive and he is ruler over all the
land of Egypt. And his heart fainted, because he did not
believe them.
45:27 And they told him all the words ofJoseph, which
he had said to them. And when he saw the wagons which
Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their
father revived. 45:28 And Israel said, It is enough, Joseph
my son is yet alive. I will go and see him before I die.
[Genesis 46] TOC
46:1 And Israel took his journey with all that he had
and came to Beer-sheba and offered sacrifices to the God
of his father Isaac. 46:2 And God spoke to Israel in the
visions of the night and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said,
Here I am.
46:3 And he said, I am God, the God of your
father. Do not fear to go down into Egypt, because I will
make of you a great nation there. 46:4
I will go down with
you into Egypt and I will also surely bring you up again
and Joseph will put his hand upon your eyes.
46:5 And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba and the sons
of Israel carried Jacob their father and their little ones and
their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him.
46:6 And they took up their goods and all their
property, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan,
they came into the land of Egypt, Jacob and all his seed
with him:
46:7
the sons and the sons of his sons with him,
his daughters and the daughters of his daughters. And he
brought all his seed into Egypt.
46:8 And these are the names of the sons of Israel, who
came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's
firstborn. 46:9 And the sons of Reuben were: Hanoch and
Pallu and Hezron and Carmi.
46:10 And the sons of Simeon
were: Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar
and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman. 46:11 And the
sons of Levi were: Gershon, Kohath and Merari.
46:12 And
the sons ofJudah were: Er and Onan and Shelah and Perez
and Zerah. But Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.
46:13 And
the sons of Issachar were: Tola and Puvah and Job and
Shimron. 46:14 And the sons of Zebulun were: Sered and
Elon and Jahleel.
46:15 These are the sons of Leah, whom
she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, with his daughter
Dinah. All the souls of his sons and his daughters were
thirty-three.
46:16 And the sons of Gad were: Ziphion and Haggi,
Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli.
46:17 And the
sons of Asher were: Imnah and Ishvah and Ishvi and
Beriah and Serah theirsister. And the sons of Beriah were:
Heber and Malchiel.
46:18 These are the sons of Zilpah,
whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter; and these she
bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
46:19 The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife were:Joseph and
Benjamin. 46:20 And to Joseph in the land of Egypt were
born Manasseh and Ephraim, whomAsenath, the daughter
of Potipherah priest of On, bore to him.
46:21 And the sons
of Benjamin were: Bela and Becher and Ashbel, Gera and
Naaman, Ehi and Rosh, Muppim and Huppim and Ard.
46:22 These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob:
all the souls were fourteen.
46:23 And the sons of Dan were: Hushim.
46:24
 And the
sons of Naphtali were: Jahzeel and Guni and Jezer and
Shillem.
46:25 These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban
gave to Rachel his daughter and these she bore to Jacob.
All the souls were seven.
46:26 All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, that
came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the
souls were sixty-six. 46:27 And the sons of Joseph, who
were born to him in Egypt, were two souls. All the souls
of the house of Jacob, that came into Egypt, were seventy.
46:28 And he sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show
MLVbible.com GENESIS 41
the way before him to Goshen and they came into the land
of Goshen. 46:29 And Joseph made his chariot ready and
went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen. And he
presented himself to him and fell on his neck and wept on
his neck a good while. 46:30 And Israel said to Joseph, Now
let me die, since I have seen your face, that you are yet
alive.
46:31 And Joseph said to his brothers and to his father's
house, I will go up and tell Pharaoh and will say to him,
My brothers and my father's house, who were in the land
of Canaan, have come to me. 46:32 And the men are
shepherds, because they have been keepers of cattle and
they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that
they have.
46:33
 And it will happen, when Pharaoh will call you*
and will say, What is your*
occupation? 46:34
that you* will
say, Your servants have been keepers of cattle from our
youth even until now, both we and our fathers, that you*
may dwell in the land of Goshen, because every shepherd
is an abomination to the Egyptians.
[Genesis 47] TOC
47:1 Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh and said,
My father and my brothers and their flocks and their herds
and all that they have, have come out of the land of
Canaan. And behold, they are in the land of Goshen. 47:2
And he took five men from among his brothers and
presented them to Pharaoh.
47:3 And Pharaoh said to his brothers, What is your*
occupation? And they said to Pharaoh, Your servants are
shepherds, both we and our fathers. 47:4 And they said to
Pharaoh, We have come to journey in the land, because
there is no pasture for your servants' flocks, because the
famine is severe in the land of Canaan. Now therefore,
please, let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
47:5 And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, Your father
and your brothers have come to you. 47:6 The land of Egypt
is before you. Make your father and your brothers to
dwell in the best of the land; in the land of Goshen let
them dwell. And if you know any able men among them,
then make them rulers over my cattle.
47:7 And Joseph brought in Jacob his father and set
him before Pharaoh and Jacob knelt before Pharaoh. 47:8
And Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of the
years of your life? 47:9 And Jacob said to Pharaoh, The
days of the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and
thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years
of my life and they have not attained to the days of the
years of the life of my fathers in the days of their
pilgrimage. 47:10 And Jacob knelt before Pharaoh and went
out from the presence of Pharaoh.
47:11 And Joseph placed his father and his brothers and
gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of
the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had
commanded. 47:12 And Joseph nourished his father and his
brothers and all his father's household, with bread,
according to their families.
47:13 And there was no bread in all the land, because
the famine was very severe, so that the land of Egypt and
the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine. 47:14
And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in
the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, for the grain
which they bought. And Joseph brought the money into
Pharaoh's house.
47:15 And when the money was all spent in the land of
Egypt and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to
Joseph and said, Give us bread, why should we die in your
presence? Because our money fails.
47:16 And Joseph said, Give your*
cattle and I will give
you*
for your*
cattle, if money fails. 47:17 And they brought
their cattle to Joseph. And Joseph gave them bread in
exchange for the horses and for the flocks and for the
herds and for the donkeys. And he fed them with bread in
exchange for all their cattle for that year.
47:18 And when that year was ended, they came to him
the second year and said to him, We will not hide from my
lord, how that our money is all spent and the herds of
cattle are my lord's; there is nothing left in the sight of my
lord, but our bodies and our lands. 47:19 Why should we die
before your eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our
land for bread and we and our land will be servants to
Pharaoh. And give us seed, that we may live and not die
and that the land not be desolate.
47:20 So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for
Pharaoh. Because the Egyptians, every man, sold his field,
because the famine was severe upon them. And the land
became Pharaoh's. 47:21 And as for the people, he moved
them to the cities from one end of the border of Egypt
even to the other end of it.
47:22 Only he did not buy the
land of the priests, because the priests had a portion from
Pharaoh and ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them.
Therefore they did not sell their land.
47:23 Then Joseph said to the people, Behold, I have
bought you*
 this day and your*
land for Pharaoh. Behold,
here is seed for you*
 and you* will sow the land. 47:24
 And
it will happen at the harvest gathering, that you* will give
a fifth to Pharaoh and four parts will be your*
own, for
seed of the field and for your*
food and for those of your*
households and for food for your*
 little ones.
47:25 And they said, You have saved our lives. Let us
find favor in the sight of my lord and we will be Pharaoh's
servants.
47:26 And Joseph made it a statute concerning the land
of Egypt to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth.
Only the land of the priests alone did not become
Pharaoh's.
47:27 And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the land
42 GENESIS MLVbible.org
of Goshen. And they got possessions in it and were
fruitful and multiplied exceedingly.
47:28 And Jacob lived
in the land of Egypt seventeen years. So the days of
Jacob, the years of his life, were a hundred forty-seven
years.
47:29 And the time drew near that Israel must die. And
he called his son Joseph and said to him, If now I have
found favor in your sight, I beseech you, put your hand
under my thigh {i.e. to carry him} and deal kindly and truly
with me. I beseech you, do not bury me in Egypt,
47:30
but
when I sleep with my fathers, you will carry me out of
Egypt and bury me in their tomb. And he said, I will do as
you have said.
47:31 And he said, Swear to me and he swore to him.
And Israel bowed himself upon the head of the bed.
[Genesis 48] TOC
48:1 And it happened after these things, that it was
reported to Joseph, Behold, your father is sick. And he
took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. 48:2
And it was reported to Jacob, saying, Behold, your son
Joseph comes to you. And Israelstrengthened himself and
sat upon the bed.
48:3And Jacob said to Joseph, God Almighty appeared
to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me, 48:4
and
said to me, Behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply
you and I will make of you a company of peoples and will
give this land to your seed after you for an everlasting
possession.
48:5 And now your two sons, who were born to you in
the land of Egypt before I came to you into Egypt, are
mine, Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and
Simeon, will be mine. 48:6 And your offspring, which you
father after them, will be yours; they will be called after
the name of their brothers in their inheritance.
48:7 And as for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel
died by me in the land of Canaan on the way, when there
was still some distance to come to Ephrath. And I buried
her there on the way to Ephrath (what is Bethlehem).
48:8 And Israel beheld Joseph's sons and said, Who are
these? 48:9 And Joseph said to his father, They are my
sons, whom God has given me here. And he said, I
beseech you, bring them to me and I will bless them.
48:10 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that
he could not see. And he brought them near to him and he
kissed them and embraced them.
48:11 And Israel said to
Joseph, I had not a prayer to see your face, and behold,
God has let me see your seed also.
48:12 And Joseph brought them out from between his
knees and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. 48:13
And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand
toward Israel's left hand and Manasseh in his left hand
toward Israel's right hand and brought them near to him.
48:14 And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it
upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger and his left
hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands
deliberately, because Manasseh was the firstborn.
48:15 And he blessed Joseph and said, The God before
whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God
who has fed me all my life long to this day,
48:16
the
messenger who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads and let my name be named on them and the name of
my fathers Abraham and Isaac and let them grow into a
multitude in the midst of the earth.
48:17 And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he
held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head
to Manasseh's head. 48:18 And Joseph said to his father, Not
so, my father, because this is the firstborn, put your right
hand upon his head.
48:19
 And his father refused and said, I know, my son,
I know. He also will become a people and he also will be
great. However, his younger brother will be greater than
he and his seed will become a multitude of nations. 48:20
And he blessed them that day, saying, Israel will be
blessed in you, saying, God make you like Ephraim and
like Manasseh. And he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
48:21 And Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I die, but God
will be with you*
and bring you*
again to the land of your*
fathers. 48:22 Moreover I have given to you one portion
above your brothers, which I took out of the hand of the
Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
[Genesis 49] TOC
49:1 And Jacob called to his sons and said, gather
yourselves together, that I may tell you* what will befall
you*
in the latter days. 49:2 Assemble yourselves and hear,
you*
 sons of Jacob and listen to Israel your*
 father.
49:3 Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might and the
beginning of my strength, the preeminence of dignity and
the pre-eminence of power.
49:4 Boiling over as water, you
will not have the pre-eminence, because you went up to
your father's bed, then you defiled it; he went up to my
couch.
49:5 Simeon and Levi are brothers, weapons of
violence are their swords. 49:6 O my soul, do not come into
their council, to their assembly, my glory, do not be
united, because they struck a man in their anger and they
crippled an ox in their self-will.
49:7 Cursed is their anger,
because it was fierce and their wrath, because it was cruel.
I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel.
49:8
Judah, your brothers will praise you. Your hand
will be on the neck of your enemies. Your father's sons
will bow down before you. 49:9
Judah is a lion's cub. My
son, you have gone up from the prey. He stooped down, he
couched as a lion and as a lioness, who will rouse him up?
MLVbible.com GENESIS 43
49:10 The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the
ruler's staff from between his feet, until he comes to
whom it belongs and the obedience of the peoples will be
to him.
49:11 Binding his foal to the vine and his donkey's
colt to the choice vine, he has washed his garments in
wine and his raiment in the blood of grapes. 49:12 His eyes
will be red with wine and his teeth white with milk.
49:13 Zebulun will dwell at the haven of the sea and he
will be for a haven of ships. And his border will be upon
Sidon.
49:14
Issachar is a strong donkey, couching down
between the sheepfolds. 49:15 And he saw a resting place
that it was good and the land that it was pleasant. And he
bowed his shoulder to bear and became a servant under
forced-labor.
49:16 Dan will judge his people, as one of the tribes of
Israel.
49:17 Dan will be a serpent in the way, an adder in
the path, that bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls
backward. 49:18
I have waited for your salvation, O
Jehovah.
49:19 Gad, a troop will press upon him, but he will
press upon their heel.
49:20 Out of Asher his bread will be fat and he will
yield royal delicacies.
49:21 Naphtali is a female-deer let loose. He gives
pleasant words.
49:22 Joseph is a fruitful son, a fruitful son by a
fountain, his daughters run over the wall.
49:23 The archers
embittered at him and shot at him and persecute him,
49:24
but his bow abode in strength. And the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the Mighty One of
Jacob (the shepherd, the stone of Israel is from there),
49:25
even by the God of your father, who will help you and by
the Almighty, who will bless you with blessings of heaven
above, blessings of the deep that lies beneath, blessings of
the breasts and of the womb.
49:26The blessings of yourfather have prevailed above
the blessings of my forefathers to the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills. They will be on the head of Joseph and
on the crown of the head of him who was separate from
his brothers.
49:27Benjamin is a wolf which tears. In the morning he
will devour the prey and at evening he will divide the
spoil.
49:28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel and this is
it that their father spoke to them and blessed them; every
man according to his blessing he blessed them.
49:29 And he ordered them and said to them, I am to be
gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the
cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite, 49:30
in the
cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before
Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought
with the field from Ephron the Hittite for a possession of
a burying place.
49:31 They buried Abraham and Sarah his wife there;
they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife there and I buried
Leah there, 49:32
in the field and the cave that is in it, which
was purchased from the sons of Heth.
49:33 And when Jacob made an end of charging his
sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed and yielded up
the spirit and was gathered to his people.
[Genesis 50] TOC
50:1 And Joseph fell upon his father's face and wept
upon him and kissed him.
50:2 And Joseph commanded his
servants the physicians to embalm his father. And the
physicians embalmed Israel.
50:3 And forty days were
fulfilled for him, because so are fulfilled the days of
embalming. And the Egyptians wept for himseventy days.
50:4 And when the days of weeping for him were past,
Joseph spoke to the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I
have found favor in your*
eyes, speak, I beseech you*
, in
the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
50:5 My father made me swear,
saying, Behold, I die. In my grave which I have dug for me
in the land of Canaan, you will you bury me there. Now
therefore let me go up, I beseech you and bury my father
and I will come again.
50:6 And Pharaoh said, Go up and bury your father,
just-as he made you swear.
50:7 And Joseph went up to bury his father and with
him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his
house and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
50:8
and all
the house ofJoseph and his brothers and his father's house.
Only their little ones and their flocks and their herds, they
left in the land of Goshen. 50:9 And both chariots and
horsemen went up with him there. And it was a very great
company.
50:10 And they came to the threshing floor of Atad
{Thorns}, which is beyond the Jordan. And they lamented
there with a very great and sore lamentation. And he made
a mourning for his father seven days. 50:11 And when the
inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning
in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning
to the Egyptians. Therefore the name of it was called
Abel-mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
50:12 And his sons did to him just-as he commanded
them.
50:13 His sons carried him into the land of Canaan
and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham bought with the field, for a possession of
a burying place, of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
50:14 And Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his
brothers and all who went up with him to bury his father,
after he had buried his father.
50:15 And when Joseph's
brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, It may
be that Joseph will hate us and will return to us all the evil
which we did to him.
50:16 And they sent a message to Joseph, saying, Your
44
GENESIS MLVbible.org
father commanded before he died, saying, 
50:17 So will you say to Joseph,
Forgive, I beseech you now, the transgression of your brothers and their sin, because they did to you evil. 
And now, please, forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father.
And Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
50:18 And his brothers also went and fell down before his face and they said,
Behold, we are your servants.
50:19 And Joseph said to them,
Do not fear, because am I in the place of God?
50:20 And as for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save many people alive.
50:21 Now therefore do not fear.
I will nourish you and your little ones.
And he comforted them and spoke kindly to them.
50:22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his father's house.
And Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.
50:23 And Joseph saw Ephraim's sons of the third generation.
Also the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh were born upon Joseph's knees.
50:24 And Joseph said to his brothers, I die, but God will surely visit you and bring you up out of this land to the land which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.
50:25 And Joseph took an oath of the sons of Israel, saying,
God will surely visit you and you will carry upmy bones from here.
50:26 So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years old and they embalmed him and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.